--- Article: Deep learning ---
In machine learning, deep learning (DL) focuses on utilizing multilayered neural networks to perform tasks such as classification, regression, and representation learning. The field takes inspiration from biological neuroscience and revolves around stacking artificial neurons into layers and "training" them to process data. The adjective "deep" refers to the use of multiple layers (ranging from three to several hundred or thousands) in the network. Methods used can be supervised, semi-supervised or unsupervised.
Some common deep learning network architectures include fully connected networks, deep belief networks, recurrent neural networks, convolutional neural networks, generative adversarial networks, transformers, and neural radiance fields. These architectures have been applied to fields including computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing, machine translation, bioinformatics, drug design, medical image analysis, climate science, material inspection and board game programs, where they have produced results comparable to and in some cases surpassing human expert performance.
Early forms of neural networks were inspired by information processing and distributed communication nodes in biological systems, particularly the human brain. However, current neural networks do not intend to model the brain function of organisms, and are generally seen as low-quality models for that purpose.
Most modern deep learning models are based on multi-layered neural networks such as convolutional neural networks and transformers, although they can also include propositional formulas or latent variables organized layer-wise in deep generative models such as the nodes in deep belief networks and deep Boltzmann machines.
Fundamentally, deep learning refers to a class of machine learning algorithms in which a hierarchy of layers is used to transform input data into a progressively more abstract and composite representation. For example, in an image recognition model, the raw input may be an image (represented as a tensor of pixels). The first representational layer may attempt to identify basic shapes such as lines and circles, the second layer may compose and encode arrangements of edges, the third layer may encode a nose and eyes, and the fourth layer may recognize that the image contains a face.
Importantly, a deep learning process can learn which features to optimally place at which level on its own. Prior to deep learning, machine learning techniques often involved hand-crafted feature engineering to transform the data into a more suitable representation for a classification algorithm to operate on. In the deep learning approach, features are not hand-crafted and the model discovers useful feature representations from the data automatically. This does not eliminate the need for hand-tuning; for example, varying numbers of layers and layer sizes can provide different degrees of abstraction.
The word "deep" in "deep learning" refers to the number of layers through which the data is transformed. More precisely, deep learning systems have a substantial credit assignment path (CAP) depth. The CAP is the chain of transformations from input to output. CAPs describe potentially causal connections between input and output. For a feedforward neural network, the depth of the CAPs is that of the network and is the number of hidden layers plus one (as the output layer is also parameterized). For recurrent neural networks, in which a signal may propagate through a layer more than once, the CAP depth is potentially unlimited. No universally agreed-upon threshold of depth divides shallow learning from deep learning, but most researchers agree that deep learning involves CAP depth higher than two. CAP of depth two has been shown to be a universal approximator in the sense that it can emulate any function. Beyond that, more layers do not add to the function approximator ability of the network. Deep models (CAP > two) are able to extract better features than shallow models and hence, extra layers help in learning the features effectively.
Deep learning architectures can be constructed with a greedy layer-by-layer method. Deep learning helps to disentangle these abstractions and pick out which features improve performance.
Deep learning algorithms can be applied to unsupervised learning tasks. This is an important benefit because unlabeled data is more abundant than labeled data. Examples of deep structures that can be trained in an unsupervised manner are deep belief networks.
The term deep learning was introduced to the machine learning community by Rina Dechter in 1986, and to artificial neural networks by Igor Aizenberg and colleagues in 2000, in the context of Boolean threshold neurons. The etymology of the term is more complicated.
Deep neural networks are generally interpreted in terms of the universal approximation theorem or probabilistic inference.
The classic universal approximation theorem concerns the capacity of feedforward neural networks with a single hidden layer of finite size to approximate continuous functions. In 1989, the first proof was published by George Cybenko for sigmoid activation functions and was generalised to feed-forward multi-layer architectures in 1991 by Kurt Hornik. Recent work also showed that universal approximation also holds for non-bounded activation functions such as Kunihiko Fukushima's rectified linear unit.
The universal approximation theorem for deep neural networks concerns the capacity of networks with bounded width but the depth is allowed to grow. Lu et al. proved that if the width of a deep neural network with ReLU activation is strictly larger than the input dimension, then the network can approximate any Lebesgue integrable function; if the width is smaller or equal to the input dimension, then a deep neural network is not a universal approximator.
The probabilistic interpretation derives from the field of machine learning. It features inference, as well as the optimization concepts of training and testing, related to fitting and generalization, respectively. More specifically, the probabilistic interpretation considers the activation nonlinearity as a cumulative distribution function. The probabilistic interpretation led to the introduction of dropout as regularizer in neural networks. The probabilistic interpretation was introduced by researchers including Hopfield, Widrow and Narendra and popularized in surveys such as the one by Bishop.
There are two types of artificial neural network (ANN): feedforward neural network (FNN) or multilayer perceptron (MLP) and recurrent neural networks (RNN). RNNs have cycles in their connectivity structure, whereas FNNs do not. In the 1920s, Wilhelm Lenz and Ernst Ising created the Ising model which is essentially a non-learning RNN architecture consisting of neuron-like threshold elements. In 1972, Shun'ichi Amari made this architecture adaptive. His learning RNN was republished by John Hopfield in 1982. Other early recurrent neural networks were published by Kaoru Nakano in 1971. Already in 1948, Alan Turing produced work on "Intelligent Machinery" that was not published in his lifetime, containing "ideas related to artificial evolution and learning RNNs".
Frank Rosenblatt (1958) proposed the perceptron, an MLP with 3 layers: an input layer, a hidden layer with randomized weights that did not learn, and an output layer. He later published a 1962 book that also introduced variants and computer experiments, including a version with four-layer perceptrons "with adaptive preterminal networks" where the last two layers have learned weights (here he credits H. D. Block and B. W. Knight). The book cites an earlier network by R. D. Joseph (1960) "functionally equivalent to a variation of" this four-layer system (the book mentions Joseph over 30 times). Should Joseph therefore be considered the originator of proper adaptive multilayer perceptrons with learning hidden units? Unfortunately, the learning algorithm was not a functional one, and fell into oblivion.
The first working deep learning algorithm was the Group method of data handling, a method to train arbitrarily deep neural networks, published by Alexey Ivakhnenko and Lapa in 1965. They regarded it as a form of polynomial regression, or a generalization of Rosenblatt's perceptron to handle more complex, nonlinear, and hierarchical relationships. A 1971 paper described a deep network with eight layers trained by this method, which is based on layer by layer training through regression analysis. Superfluous hidden units are pruned using a separate validation set. Since the activation functions of the nodes are Kolmogorov-Gabor polynomials, these were also the first deep networks with multiplicative units or "gates".
The first deep learning multilayer perceptron trained by stochastic gradient descent was published in 1967 by Shun'ichi Amari. In computer experiments conducted by Amari's student Saito, a five layer MLP with two modifiable layers learned internal representations to classify non-linearily separable pattern classes. Subsequent developments in hardware and hyperparameter tunings have made end-to-end stochastic gradient descent the currently dominant training technique.
In 1969, Kunihiko Fukushima introduced the ReLU (rectified linear unit) activation function. The rectifier has become the most popular activation function for deep learning.
Deep learning architectures for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with convolutional layers and downsampling layers began with the Neocognitron introduced by Kunihiko Fukushima in 1979, though not trained by backpropagation.
Backpropagation is an efficient application of the chain rule derived by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in 1673 to networks of differentiable nodes. The terminology "back-propagating errors" was actually introduced in 1962 by Rosenblatt, but he did not know how to implement this, although Henry J. Kelley had a continuous precursor of backpropagation in 1960 in the context of control theory. The modern form of backpropagation was first published in Seppo Linnainmaa's master thesis (1970). G.M. Ostrovski et al. republished it in 1971. Paul Werbos applied backpropagation to neural networks in 1982 (his 1974 PhD thesis, reprinted in a 1994 book, did not yet describe the algorithm). In 1986, David E. Rumelhart et al. popularised backpropagation but did not cite the original work.
The time delay neural network (TDNN) was introduced in 1987 by Alex Waibel to apply CNN to phoneme recognition. It used convolutions, weight sharing, and backpropagation. In 1988, Wei Zhang applied a backpropagation-trained CNN to alphabet recognition.
In 1989, Yann LeCun et al. created a CNN called LeNet for recognizing handwritten ZIP codes on mail. Training required 3 days. In 1990, Wei Zhang implemented a CNN on optical computing hardware. In 1991, a CNN was applied to medical image object segmentation and breast cancer detection in mammograms. LeNet-5 (1998), a 7-level CNN by Yann LeCun et al., that classifies digits, was applied by several banks to recognize hand-written numbers on checks digitized in 32x32 pixel images.
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) were further developed in the 1980s. Recurrence is used for sequence processing, and when a recurrent network is unrolled, it mathematically resembles a deep feedforward layer. Consequently, they have similar properties and issues, and their developments had mutual influences. In RNN, two early influential works were the Jordan network (1986) and the Elman network (1990), which applied RNN to study problems in cognitive psychology.
In the 1980s, backpropagation did not work well for deep learning with long credit assignment paths. To overcome this problem, in 1991, Jürgen Schmidhuber proposed a hierarchy of RNNs pre-trained one level at a time by self-supervised learning where each RNN tries to predict its own next input, which is the next unexpected input of the RNN below. This "neural history compressor" uses predictive coding to learn internal representations at multiple self-organizing time scales. This can substantially facilitate downstream deep learning. The RNN hierarchy can be collapsed into a single RNN, by distilling a higher level chunker network into a lower level automatizer network. In 1993, a neural history compressor solved a "Very Deep Learning" task that required more than 1000 subsequent layers in an RNN unfolded in time. The "P" in ChatGPT refers to such pre-training.
Sepp Hochreiter's diploma thesis (1991) implemented the neural history compressor, and identified and analyzed the vanishing gradient problem. Hochreiter proposed recurrent residual connections to solve the vanishing gradient problem. This led to the long short-term memory (LSTM), published in 1995. LSTM can learn "very deep learning" tasks with long credit assignment paths that require memories of events that happened thousands of discrete time steps before. That LSTM was not yet the modern architecture, which required a "forget gate", introduced in 1999, which became the standard RNN architecture.
In 1991, Jürgen Schmidhuber also published adversarial neural networks that contest with each other in the form of a zero-sum game, where one network's gain is the other network's loss. The first network is a generative model that models a probability distribution over output patterns. The second network learns by gradient descent to predict the reactions of the environment to these patterns. This was called "artificial curiosity". In 2014, this principle was used in generative adversarial networks (GANs).
During 1985–1995, inspired by statistical mechanics, several architectures and methods were developed by Terry Sejnowski, Peter Dayan, Geoffrey Hinton, etc., including the Boltzmann machine, restricted Boltzmann machine, Helmholtz machine, and the wake-sleep algorithm. These were designed for unsupervised learning of deep generative models. However, those were more computationally expensive compared to backpropagation. Boltzmann machine learning algorithm, published in 1985, was briefly popular before being eclipsed by the backpropagation algorithm in 1986. (p. 112 ). A 1988 network became state of the art in protein structure prediction, an early application of deep learning to bioinformatics.
Both shallow and deep learning (e.g., recurrent nets) of ANNs for speech recognition have been explored for many years. These methods never outperformed non-uniform internal-handcrafting Gaussian mixture model/Hidden Markov model (GMM-HMM) technology based on generative models of speech trained discriminatively. Key difficulties have been analyzed, including gradient diminishing and weak temporal correlation structure in neural predictive models. Additional difficulties were the lack of training data and limited computing power.
Most speech recognition researchers moved away from neural nets to pursue generative modeling. An exception was at SRI International in the late 1990s. Funded by the US government's NSA and DARPA, SRI researched in speech and speaker recognition. The speaker recognition team led by Larry Heck reported significant success with deep neural networks in speech processing in the 1998 NIST Speaker Recognition benchmark. It was deployed in the Nuance Verifier, representing the first major industrial application of deep learning.
The principle of elevating "raw" features over hand-crafted optimization was first explored successfully in the architecture of deep autoencoder on the "raw" spectrogram or linear filter-bank features in the late 1990s, showing its superiority over the Mel-Cepstral features that contain stages of fixed transformation from spectrograms. The raw features of speech, waveforms, later produced excellent larger-scale results.
Neural networks entered a lull, and simpler models that use task-specific handcrafted features such as Gabor filters and support vector machines (SVMs) became the preferred choices in the 1990s and 2000s, because of artificial neural networks' computational cost and a lack of understanding of how the brain wires its biological networks.
In 2003, LSTM became competitive with traditional speech recognizers on certain tasks. In 2006, Alex Graves, Santiago Fernández, Faustino Gomez, and Schmidhuber combined it with connectionist temporal classification (CTC) in stacks of LSTMs. In 2009, it became the first RNN to win a pattern recognition contest, in connected handwriting recognition.
In 2006, publications by Geoff Hinton, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Osindero and Teh deep belief networks were developed for generative modeling. They are trained by training one restricted Boltzmann machine, then freezing it and training another one on top of the first one, and so on, then optionally fine-tuned using supervised backpropagation. They could model high-dimensional probability distributions, such as the distribution of MNIST images, but convergence was slow.
The impact of deep learning in industry began in the early 2000s, when CNNs already processed an estimated 10% to 20% of all the checks written in the US, according to Yann LeCun. Industrial applications of deep learning to large-scale speech recognition started around 2010.
The 2009 NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning for Speech Recognition was motivated by the limitations of deep generative models of speech, and the possibility that given more capable hardware and large-scale data sets that deep neural nets might become practical. It was believed that pre-training DNNs using generative models of deep belief nets (DBN) would overcome the main difficulties of neural nets. However, it was discovered that replacing pre-training with large amounts of training data for straightforward backpropagation when using DNNs with large, context-dependent output layers produced error rates dramatically lower than then-state-of-the-art Gaussian mixture model (GMM)/Hidden Markov Model (HMM) and also than more-advanced generative model-based systems. The nature of the recognition errors produced by the two types of systems was characteristically different, offering technical insights into how to integrate deep learning into the existing highly efficient, run-time speech decoding system deployed by all major speech recognition systems. Analysis around 2009–2010, contrasting the GMM (and other generative speech models) vs. DNN models, stimulated early industrial investment in deep learning for speech recognition. That analysis was done with comparable performance (less than 1.5% in error rate) between discriminative DNNs and generative models.
In 2010, researchers extended deep learning from TIMIT to large vocabulary speech recognition, by adopting large output layers of the DNN based on context-dependent HMM states constructed by decision trees.
=== Deep learning revolution ===
The deep learning revolution started around CNN- and GPU-based computer vision.
Although CNNs trained by backpropagation had been around for decades and GPU implementations of NNs for years, including CNNs, faster implementations of CNNs on GPUs were needed to progress on computer vision. Later, as deep learning becomes widespread, specialized hardware and algorithm optimizations were developed specifically for deep learning.
A key advance for the deep learning revolution was hardware advances, especially GPU. Some early work dated back to 2004. In 2009, Raina, Madhavan, and Andrew Ng reported a 100M deep belief network trained on 30 Nvidia GeForce GTX 280 GPUs, an early demonstration of GPU-based deep learning. They reported up to 70 times faster training.
In 2011, a CNN named DanNet by Dan Ciresan, Ueli Meier, Jonathan Masci, Luca Maria Gambardella, and Jürgen Schmidhuber achieved for the first time superhuman performance in a visual pattern recognition contest, outperforming traditional methods by a factor of 3. It then won more contests. They also showed how max-pooling CNNs on GPU improved performance significantly.
In 2012, Andrew Ng and Jeff Dean created an FNN that learned to recognize higher-level concepts, such as cats, only from watching unlabeled images taken from YouTube videos.
In October 2012, AlexNet by Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey Hinton won the large-scale ImageNet competition by a significant margin over shallow machine learning methods. Further incremental improvements included the VGG-16 network by Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman and Google's Inceptionv3.
The success in image classification was then extended to the more challenging task of generating descriptions (captions) for images, often as a combination of CNNs and LSTMs.
In 2014, the state of the art was training "very deep neural network" with 20 to 30 layers. Stacking too many layers led to a steep reduction in training accuracy, known as the "degradation" problem. In 2015, two techniques were developed to train very deep networks: the highway network was published in May 2015, and the residual neural network (ResNet) in Dec 2015. ResNet behaves like an open-gated Highway Net.
Around the same time, deep learning started impacting the field of art. Early examples included Google DeepDream (2015), and neural style transfer (2015), both of which were based on pretrained image classification neural networks, such as VGG-19.
Generative adversarial network (GAN) by (Ian Goodfellow et al., 2014) (based on Jürgen Schmidhuber's principle of artificial curiosity)
became state of the art in generative modeling during 2014-2018 period. Excellent image quality is achieved by Nvidia's StyleGAN (2018) based on the Progressive GAN by Tero Karras et al. Here the GAN generator is grown from small to large scale in a pyramidal fashion. Image generation by GAN reached popular success, and provoked discussions concerning deepfakes. Diffusion models (2015) eclipsed GANs in generative modeling since then, with systems such as DALL·E 2 (2022) and Stable Diffusion (2022).
In 2015, Google's speech recognition improved by 49% by an LSTM-based model, which they made available through Google Voice Search on smartphone.
Deep learning is part of state-of-the-art systems in various disciplines, particularly computer vision and automatic speech recognition (ASR). Results on commonly used evaluation sets such as TIMIT (ASR) and MNIST (image classification), as well as a range of large-vocabulary speech recognition tasks have steadily improved. Convolutional neural networks were superseded for ASR by LSTM. but are more successful in computer vision.
Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton and Yann LeCun were awarded the 2018 Turing Award for "conceptual and engineering breakthroughs that have made deep neural networks a critical component of computing".
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) or connectionist systems are computing systems inspired by the biological neural networks that constitute animal brains. Such systems learn (progressively improve their ability) to do tasks by considering examples, generally without task-specific programming. For example, in image recognition, they might learn to identify images that contain cats by analyzing example images that have been manually labeled as "cat" or "no cat" and using the analytic results to identify cats in other images. They have found most use in applications difficult to express with a traditional computer algorithm using rule-based programming.
An ANN is based on a collection of connected units called artificial neurons, (analogous to biological neurons in a biological brain). Each connection (synapse) between neurons can transmit a signal to another neuron. The receiving (postsynaptic) neuron can process the signal(s) and then signal downstream neurons connected to it. Neurons may have state, generally represented by real numbers, typically between 0 and 1. Neurons and synapses may also have a weight that varies as learning proceeds, which can increase or decrease the strength of the signal that it sends downstream.
Typically, neurons are organized in layers. Different layers may perform different kinds of transformations on their inputs. Signals travel from the first (input), to the last (output) layer, possibly after traversing the layers multiple times.
The original goal of the neural network approach was to solve problems in the same way that a human brain would. Over time, attention focused on matching specific mental abilities, leading to deviations from biology such as backpropagation, or passing information in the reverse direction and adjusting the network to reflect that information.
Neural networks have been used on a variety of tasks, including computer vision, speech recognition, machine translation, social network filtering, playing board and video games and medical diagnosis.
As of 2017, neural networks typically have a few thousand to a few million units and millions of connections. Despite this number being several order of magnitude less than the number of neurons on a human brain, these networks can perform many tasks at a level beyond that of humans (e.g., recognizing faces, or playing "Go").
A deep neural network (DNN) is an artificial neural network with multiple layers between the input and output layers. There are different types of neural networks but they always consist of the same components: neurons, synapses, weights, biases, and functions. These components as a whole function in a way that mimics functions of the human brain, and can be trained like any other ML algorithm.
For example, a DNN that is trained to recognize dog breeds will go over the given image and calculate the probability that the dog in the image is a certain breed. The user can review the results and select which probabilities the network should display (above a certain threshold, etc.) and return the proposed label. Each mathematical manipulation as such is considered a layer, and complex DNN have many layers, hence the name "deep" networks.
DNNs can model complex non-linear relationships. DNN architectures generate compositional models where the object is expressed as a layered composition of primitives. The extra layers enable composition of features from lower layers, potentially modeling complex data with fewer units than a similarly performing shallow network. For instance, it was proved that sparse multivariate polynomials are exponentially easier to approximate with DNNs than with shallow networks.
Deep architectures include many variants of a few basic approaches. Each architecture has found success in specific domains. It is not always possible to compare the performance of multiple architectures, unless they have been evaluated on the same data sets.
DNNs are typically feedforward networks in which data flows from the input layer to the output layer without looping back. At first, the DNN creates a map of virtual neurons and assigns random numerical values, or "weights", to connections between them. The weights and inputs are multiplied and return an output between 0 and 1. If the network did not accurately recognize a particular pattern, an algorithm would adjust the weights. That way the algorithm can make certain parameters more influential, until it determines the correct mathematical manipulation to fully process the data.
Recurrent neural networks, in which data can flow in any direction, are used for applications such as language modeling. Long short-term memory is particularly effective for this use.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are used in computer vision. CNNs also have been applied to acoustic modeling for automatic speech recognition (ASR).
As with ANNs, many issues can arise with naively trained DNNs. Two common issues are overfitting and computation time.
DNNs are prone to overfitting because of the added layers of abstraction, which allow them to model rare dependencies in the training data. Regularization methods such as Ivakhnenko's unit pruning or weight decay (
-regularization) or sparsity (
-regularization) can be applied during training to combat overfitting. Alternatively dropout regularization randomly omits units from the hidden layers during training. This helps to exclude rare dependencies. Another interesting recent development is research into models of just enough complexity through an estimation of the intrinsic complexity of the task being modelled. This approach has been successfully applied for multivariate time series prediction tasks such as traffic prediction. Finally, data can be augmented via methods such as cropping and rotating such that smaller training sets can be increased in size to reduce the chances of overfitting.
DNNs must consider many training parameters, such as the size (number of layers and number of units per layer), the learning rate, and initial weights. Sweeping through the parameter space for optimal parameters may not be feasible due to the cost in time and computational resources. Various tricks, such as batching (computing the gradient on several training examples at once rather than individual examples) speed up computation. Large processing capabilities of many-core architectures (such as GPUs or the Intel Xeon Phi) have produced significant speedups in training, because of the suitability of such processing architectures for the matrix and vector computations.
Alternatively, engineers may look for other types of neural networks with more straightforward and convergent training algorithms. CMAC (cerebellar model articulation controller) is one such kind of neural network. It doesn't require learning rates or randomized initial weights. The training process can be guaranteed to converge in one step with a new batch of data, and the computational complexity of the training algorithm is linear with respect to the number of neurons involved.
Since the 2010s, advances in both machine learning algorithms and computer hardware have led to more efficient methods for training deep neural networks that contain many layers of non-linear hidden units and a very large output layer. By 2019, graphics processing units (GPUs), often with AI-specific enhancements, had displaced CPUs as the dominant method for training large-scale commercial cloud AI . OpenAI estimated the hardware computation used in the largest deep learning projects from AlexNet (2012) to AlphaZero (2017) and found a 300,000-fold increase in the amount of computation required, with a doubling-time trendline of 3.4 months.
Special electronic circuits called deep learning processors were designed to speed up deep learning algorithms. Deep learning processors include neural processing units (NPUs) in Huawei cellphones and cloud computing servers such as tensor processing units (TPU) in the Google Cloud Platform. Cerebras Systems has also built a dedicated system to handle large deep learning models, the CS-2, based on the largest processor in the industry, the second-generation Wafer Scale Engine (WSE-2).
Atomically thin semiconductors are considered promising for energy-efficient deep learning hardware where the same basic device structure is used for both logic operations and data storage.
In 2020, Marega et al. published experiments with a large-area active channel material for developing logic-in-memory devices and circuits based on floating-gate field-effect transistors (FGFETs).
In 2021, J. Feldmann et al. proposed an integrated photonic hardware accelerator for parallel convolutional processing. The authors identify two key advantages of integrated photonics over its electronic counterparts: (1) massively parallel data transfer through wavelength division multiplexing in conjunction with frequency combs, and (2) extremely high data modulation speeds. Their system can execute trillions of multiply-accumulate operations per second, indicating the potential of integrated photonics in data-heavy AI applications.
=== Automatic speech recognition ===
Large-scale automatic speech recognition is the first and most convincing successful case of deep learning. LSTM RNNs can learn "Very Deep Learning" tasks that involve multi-second intervals containing speech events separated by thousands of discrete time steps, where one time step corresponds to about 10 ms. LSTM with forget gates is competitive with traditional speech recognizers on certain tasks.
The initial success in speech recognition was based on small-scale recognition tasks based on TIMIT. The data set contains 630 speakers from eight major dialects of American English, where each speaker reads 10 sentences. Its small size lets many configurations be tried. More importantly, the TIMIT task concerns phone-sequence recognition, which, unlike word-sequence recognition, allows weak phone bigram language models. This lets the strength of the acoustic modeling aspects of speech recognition be more easily analyzed. The error rates listed below, including these early results and measured as percent phone error rates (PER), have been summarized since 1991.
The debut of DNNs for speaker recognition in the late 1990s and speech recognition around 2009-2011 and of LSTM around 2003–2007, accelerated progress in eight major areas:
Scale-up/out and accelerated DNN training and decoding
Sequence discriminative training
Feature processing by deep models with solid understanding of the underlying mechanisms
Adaptation of DNNs and related deep models
Multi-task and transfer learning by DNNs and related deep models
CNNs and how to design them to best exploit domain knowledge of speech
RNN and its rich LSTM variants
Other types of deep models including tensor-based models and integrated deep generative/discriminative models.
More recent speech recognition models use Transformers or Temporal Convolution Networks with significant success and widespread applications. All major commercial speech recognition systems (e.g., Microsoft Cortana, Xbox, Skype Translator, Amazon Alexa, Google Now, Apple Siri, Baidu and iFlyTek voice search, and a range of Nuance speech products, etc.) are based on deep learning.
A common evaluation set for image classification is the MNIST database data set. MNIST is composed of handwritten digits and includes 60,000 training examples and 10,000 test examples. As with TIMIT, its small size lets users test multiple configurations. A comprehensive list of results on this set is available.
Deep learning-based image recognition has become "superhuman", producing more accurate results than human contestants. This first occurred in 2011 in recognition of traffic signs, and in 2014, with recognition of human faces.
Deep learning-trained vehicles now interpret 360° camera views. Another example is Facial Dysmorphology Novel Analysis (FDNA) used to analyze cases of human malformation connected to a large database of genetic syndromes.
Closely related to the progress that has been made in image recognition is the increasing application of deep learning techniques to various visual art tasks. DNNs have proven themselves capable, for example, of
identifying the style period of a given painting
Neural Style Transfer – capturing the style of a given artwork and applying it in a visually pleasing manner to an arbitrary photograph or video
generating striking imagery based on random visual input fields.
=== Natural language processing ===
Neural networks have been used for implementing language models since the early 2000s. LSTM helped to improve machine translation and language modeling.
Other key techniques in this field are negative sampling and word embedding. Word embedding, such as word2vec, can be thought of as a representational layer in a deep learning architecture that transforms an atomic word into a positional representation of the word relative to other words in the dataset; the position is represented as a point in a vector space. Using word embedding as an RNN input layer allows the network to parse sentences and phrases using an effective compositional vector grammar. A compositional vector grammar can be thought of as probabilistic context free grammar (PCFG) implemented by an RNN. Recursive auto-encoders built atop word embeddings can assess sentence similarity and detect paraphrasing. Deep neural architectures provide the best results for constituency parsing, sentiment analysis, information retrieval, spoken language understanding, machine translation, contextual entity linking, writing style recognition, named-entity recognition (token classification), text classification, and others.
Recent developments generalize word embedding to sentence embedding.
Google Translate (GT) uses a large end-to-end long short-term memory (LSTM) network. Google Neural Machine Translation (GNMT) uses an example-based machine translation method in which the system "learns from millions of examples". It translates "whole sentences at a time, rather than pieces". Google Translate supports over one hundred languages. The network encodes the "semantics of the sentence rather than simply memorizing phrase-to-phrase translations". GT uses English as an intermediate between most language pairs.
=== Drug discovery and toxicology ===
A large percentage of candidate drugs fail to win regulatory approval. These failures are caused by insufficient efficacy (on-target effect), undesired interactions (off-target effects), or unanticipated toxic effects. Research has explored use of deep learning to predict the biomolecular targets, off-targets, and toxic effects of environmental chemicals in nutrients, household products and drugs.
AtomNet is a deep learning system for structure-based rational drug design. AtomNet was used to predict novel candidate biomolecules for disease targets such as the Ebola virus and multiple sclerosis.
In 2017 graph neural networks were used for the first time to predict various properties of molecules in a large toxicology data set. In 2019, generative neural networks were used to produce molecules that were validated experimentally all the way into mice.
=== Recommendation systems ===
Recommendation systems have used deep learning to extract meaningful features for a latent factor model for content-based music and journal recommendations. Multi-view deep learning has been applied for learning user preferences from multiple domains. The model uses a hybrid collaborative and content-based approach and enhances recommendations in multiple tasks.
An autoencoder ANN was used in bioinformatics, to predict gene ontology annotations and gene-function relationships.
In medical informatics, deep learning was used to predict sleep quality based on data from wearables and predictions of health complications from electronic health record data.
Deep neural networks have shown unparalleled performance in predicting protein structure, according to the sequence of the amino acids that make it up. In 2020, AlphaFold, a deep-learning based system, achieved a level of accuracy significantly higher than all previous computational methods.
=== Deep Neural Network Estimations ===
Deep neural networks can be used to estimate the entropy of a stochastic process through an arrangement called a Neural Joint Entropy Estimator (NJEE). Such an estimation provides insights on the effects of input random variables on an independent random variable. Practically, the DNN is trained as a classifier that maps an input vector or matrix X to an output probability distribution over the possible classes of random variable Y, given input X. For example, in image classification tasks, the NJEE maps a vector of pixels' color values to probabilities over possible image classes. In practice, the probability distribution of Y is obtained by a Softmax layer with number of nodes that is equal to the alphabet size of Y. NJEE uses continuously differentiable activation functions, such that the conditions for the universal approximation theorem holds. It is shown that this method provides a strongly consistent estimator and outperforms other methods in cases of large alphabet sizes.
=== Medical image analysis ===
Deep learning has been shown to produce competitive results in medical applications such as cancer cell classification, lesion detection, organ segmentation and image enhancement. Modern deep learning tools demonstrate the high accuracy of detecting various diseases and the helpfulness of their use by specialists to improve the diagnosis efficiency.
Finding the appropriate mobile audience for mobile advertising is always challenging, since many data points must be considered and analyzed before a target segment can be created and used in ad serving by any ad server. Deep learning has been used to interpret large, many-dimensioned advertising datasets. Many data points are collected during the request/serve/click internet advertising cycle. This information can form the basis of machine learning to improve ad selection.
Deep learning has been successfully applied to inverse problems such as denoising, super-resolution, inpainting, and film colorization. These applications include learning methods such as "Shrinkage Fields for Effective Image Restoration" which trains on an image dataset, and Deep Image Prior, which trains on the image that needs restoration.
=== Financial fraud detection ===
Deep learning is being applied to financial fraud detection, tax evasion detection, and anti-money laundering.
In November 2023, researchers at Google DeepMind and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory announced that they had developed an AI system known as GNoME. This system has contributed to materials science by discovering over 2 million new materials within a relatively short timeframe. GNoME employs deep learning techniques to efficiently explore potential material structures, achieving a significant increase in the identification of stable inorganic crystal structures. The system's predictions were validated through autonomous robotic experiments, demonstrating a noteworthy success rate of 71%. The data of newly discovered materials is publicly available through the Materials Project database, offering researchers the opportunity to identify materials with desired properties for various applications. This development has implications for the future of scientific discovery and the integration of AI in material science research, potentially expediting material innovation and reducing costs in product development. The use of AI and deep learning suggests the possibility of minimizing or eliminating manual lab experiments and allowing scientists to focus more on the design and analysis of unique compounds.
The United States Department of Defense applied deep learning to train robots in new tasks through observation.
=== Partial differential equations ===
Physics-informed neural networks have been used to solve partial differential equations in both forward and inverse problems in a data driven manner. One example is the reconstructing fluid flow governed by the Navier-Stokes equations. Using physics informed neural networks does not require the often expensive mesh generation that conventional CFD methods rely on. It is evident that geometric and physical constraints have a synergistic effect on neural PDE surrogates, thereby enhancing their efficacy in predicting stable and super long rollouts.
=== Deep backward stochastic differential equation method ===
Deep backward stochastic differential equation method is a numerical method that combines deep learning with Backward stochastic differential equation (BSDE). This method is particularly useful for solving high-dimensional problems in financial mathematics. By leveraging the powerful function approximation capabilities of deep neural networks, deep BSDE addresses the computational challenges faced by traditional numerical methods in high-dimensional settings. Specifically, traditional methods like finite difference methods or Monte Carlo simulations often struggle with the curse of dimensionality, where computational cost increases exponentially with the number of dimensions. Deep BSDE methods, however, employ deep neural networks to approximate solutions of high-dimensional partial differential equations (PDEs), effectively reducing the computational burden.
In addition, the integration of Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) into the deep BSDE framework enhances its capability by embedding the underlying physical laws directly into the neural network architecture. This ensures that the solutions not only fit the data but also adhere to the governing stochastic differential equations. PINNs leverage the power of deep learning while respecting the constraints imposed by the physical models, resulting in more accurate and reliable solutions for financial mathematics problems.
Image reconstruction is the reconstruction of the underlying images from the image-related measurements. Several works showed the better and superior performance of the deep learning methods compared to analytical methods for various applications, e.g., spectral imaging and ultrasound imaging.
Traditional weather prediction systems solve a very complex system of partial differential equations. GraphCast is a deep learning based model, trained on a long history of weather data to predict how weather patterns change over time. It is able to predict weather conditions for up to 10 days globally, at a very detailed level, and in under a minute, with precision similar to state of the art systems.
An epigenetic clock is a biochemical test that can be used to measure age. Galkin et al. used deep neural networks to train an epigenetic aging clock of unprecedented accuracy using >6,000 blood samples. The clock uses information from 1000 CpG sites and predicts people with certain conditions older than healthy controls: IBD, frontotemporal dementia, ovarian cancer, obesity. The aging clock was planned to be released for public use in 2021 by an Insilico Medicine spinoff company Deep Longevity.
== Relation to human cognitive and brain development ==
Deep learning is closely related to a class of theories of brain development (specifically, neocortical development) proposed by cognitive neuroscientists in the early 1990s. These developmental theories were instantiated in computational models, making them predecessors of deep learning systems. These developmental models share the property that various proposed learning dynamics in the brain (e.g., a wave of nerve growth factor) support the self-organization somewhat analogous to the neural networks utilized in deep learning models. Like the neocortex, neural networks employ a hierarchy of layered filters in which each layer considers information from a prior layer (or the operating environment), and then passes its output (and possibly the original input), to other layers. This process yields a self-organizing stack of transducers, well-tuned to their operating environment. A 1995 description stated, "...the infant's brain seems to organize itself under the influence of waves of so-called trophic-factors ... different regions of the brain become connected sequentially, with one layer of tissue maturing before another and so on until the whole brain is mature".
A variety of approaches have been used to investigate the plausibility of deep learning models from a neurobiological perspective. On the one hand, several variants of the backpropagation algorithm have been proposed in order to increase its processing realism. Other researchers have argued that unsupervised forms of deep learning, such as those based on hierarchical generative models and deep belief networks, may be closer to biological reality. In this respect, generative neural network models have been related to neurobiological evidence about sampling-based processing in the cerebral cortex.
Although a systematic comparison between the human brain organization and the neuronal encoding in deep networks has not yet been established, several analogies have been reported. For example, the computations performed by deep learning units could be similar to those of actual neurons and neural populations. Similarly, the representations developed by deep learning models are similar to those measured in the primate visual system both at the single-unit and at the population levels.
Facebook's AI lab performs tasks such as automatically tagging uploaded pictures with the names of the people in them.
Google's DeepMind Technologies developed a system capable of learning how to play Atari video games using only pixels as data input. In 2015 they demonstrated their AlphaGo system, which learned the game of Go well enough to beat a professional Go player. Google Translate uses a neural network to translate between more than 100 languages.
In 2017, Covariant.ai was launched, which focuses on integrating deep learning into factories.
As of 2008, researchers at The University of Texas at Austin (UT) developed a machine learning framework called Training an Agent Manually via Evaluative Reinforcement, or TAMER, which proposed new methods for robots or computer programs to learn how to perform tasks by interacting with a human instructor. First developed as TAMER, a new algorithm called Deep TAMER was later introduced in 2018 during a collaboration between U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) and UT researchers. Deep TAMER used deep learning to provide a robot with the ability to learn new tasks through observation. Using Deep TAMER, a robot learned a task with a human trainer, watching video streams or observing a human perform a task in-person. The robot later practiced the task with the help of some coaching from the trainer, who provided feedback such as "good job" and "bad job".
Deep learning has attracted both criticism and comment, in some cases from outside the field of computer science.
A main criticism concerns the lack of theory surrounding some methods. Learning in the most common deep architectures is implemented using well-understood gradient descent. However, the theory surrounding other algorithms, such as contrastive divergence is less clear. (e.g., Does it converge? If so, how fast? What is it approximating?) Deep learning methods are often looked at as a black box, with most confirmations done empirically, rather than theoretically.
In further reference to the idea that artistic sensitivity might be inherent in relatively low levels of the cognitive hierarchy, a published series of graphic representations of the internal states of deep (20-30 layers) neural networks attempting to discern within essentially random data the images on which they were trained demonstrate a visual appeal: the original research notice received well over 1,000 comments, and was the subject of what was for a time the most frequently accessed article on The Guardian's website.
With the support of Innovation Diffusion Theory (IDT), a study analyzed the diffusion of Deep Learning in BRICS and OECD countries using data from Google Trends.
Some deep learning architectures display problematic behaviors, such as confidently classifying unrecognizable images as belonging to a familiar category of ordinary images (2014) and misclassifying minuscule perturbations of correctly classified images (2013). Goertzel hypothesized that these behaviors are due to limitations in their internal representations and that these limitations would inhibit integration into heterogeneous multi-component artificial general intelligence (AGI) architectures. These issues may possibly be addressed by deep learning architectures that internally form states homologous to image-grammar decompositions of observed entities and events. Learning a grammar (visual or linguistic) from training data would be equivalent to restricting the system to commonsense reasoning that operates on concepts in terms of grammatical production rules and is a basic goal of both human language acquisition and artificial intelligence (AI).
As deep learning moves from the lab into the world, research and experience show that artificial neural networks are vulnerable to hacks and deception. By identifying patterns that these systems use to function, attackers can modify inputs to ANNs in such a way that the ANN finds a match that human observers would not recognize. For example, an attacker can make subtle changes to an image such that the ANN finds a match even though the image looks to a human nothing like the search target. Such manipulation is termed an "adversarial attack".
In 2016 researchers used one ANN to doctor images in trial and error fashion, identify another's focal points, and thereby generate images that deceived it. The modified images looked no different to human eyes. Another group showed that printouts of doctored images then photographed successfully tricked an image classification system. One defense is reverse image search, in which a possible fake image is submitted to a site such as TinEye that can then find other instances of it. A refinement is to search using only parts of the image, to identify images from which that piece may have been taken.
Another group showed that certain psychedelic spectacles could fool a facial recognition system into thinking ordinary people were celebrities, potentially allowing one person to impersonate another. In 2017 researchers added stickers to stop signs and caused an ANN to misclassify them.
ANNs can however be further trained to detect attempts at deception, potentially leading attackers and defenders into an arms race similar to the kind that already defines the malware defense industry. ANNs have been trained to defeat ANN-based anti-malware software by repeatedly attacking a defense with malware that was continually altered by a genetic algorithm until it tricked the anti-malware while retaining its ability to damage the target.
In 2016, another group demonstrated that certain sounds could make the Google Now voice command system open a particular web address, and hypothesized that this could "serve as a stepping stone for further attacks (e.g., opening a web page hosting drive-by malware)".
In "data poisoning", false data is continually smuggled into a machine learning system's training set to prevent it from achieving mastery.
=== Data collection ethics ===
The deep learning systems that are trained using supervised learning often rely on data that is created or annotated by humans, or both. It has been argued that not only low-paid clickwork (such as on Amazon Mechanical Turk) is regularly deployed for this purpose, but also implicit forms of human microwork that are often not recognized as such. The philosopher Rainer Mühlhoff distinguishes five types of "machinic capture" of human microwork to generate training data: (1) gamification (the embedding of annotation or computation tasks in the flow of a game), (2) "trapping and tracking" (e.g. CAPTCHAs for image recognition or click-tracking on Google search results pages), (3) exploitation of social motivations (e.g. tagging faces on Facebook to obtain labeled facial images), (4) information mining (e.g. by leveraging quantified-self devices such as activity trackers) and (5) clickwork.

--- Article: Transformer (deep learning) ---
In deep learning, the transformer is a family of artificial neural network architectures based on the multi-head attention mechanism, in which text is converted to numerical representations called tokens, and each token is converted into a vector via lookup from a word embedding table. At each layer, each token is then contextualized within the scope of the context window with other (unmasked) tokens via a parallel multi-head attention mechanism, allowing the signal for key tokens to be amplified and less important tokens to be diminished. Because self-attention alone is permutation-invariant, transformers inject positional information, typically through positional encodings or learned positional embeddings, so token order can affect the output.
Transformers have the advantage of having no recurrent units, therefore requiring less training time than earlier recurrent neural architectures (RNNs) such as long short-term memory (LSTM). Later variations have been widely adopted for training large language models (LLMs) on large (language) datasets. Modern transformer designs are commonly grouped into encoder-only, decoder-only, and encoder-decoder variants, depending on whether they are optimized for representation learning, autoregressive generation, or conditional sequence-to-sequence tasks.
The original version of the transformer architecture was proposed in the 2017 paper "Attention Is All You Need" by researchers at Google. The predecessors of transformers were developed as an improvement over previous architectures for machine translation, but have found many applications since. They are used in large-scale natural language processing, computer vision (vision transformers), reinforcement learning, audio, multimodal learning, robotics,, playing chess and at disaster responses. It has also led to the development of pre-trained systems, such as generative pre-trained transformers (GPTs) and BERT (bidirectional encoder representations from transformers).
For many years, sequence modelling and generation was done by using plain recurrent neural networks (RNNs). A well-cited early example was the Elman network (1990). In theory, the information from one token can propagate arbitrarily far down the sequence, but in practice the vanishing-gradient problem leaves the model's state at the end of a long sentence without precise, extractable information about preceding tokens.
A key breakthrough was LSTM (originally described in a 1995 technical report and formally published in 1997), an RNN that introduced gating mechanisms to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem, allowing efficient learning of long-sequence modelling. One key architectural element was the use of multiplicative gating units, in which the outputs of some neurons modulate the outputs of others. These multiplicative units are conceptually distinct from the additive attention mechanism later introduced for sequence-to-sequence models.
Neural networks using multiplicative units were later called sigma-pi networks or higher-order networks. LSTM became the standard architecture for long sequence modelling until the 2017 publication of transformers. However, LSTM still used sequential processing, like most other RNNs. Specifically, RNNs operate one token at a time from first to last; they cannot operate in parallel over all tokens in a sequence.
Modern transformers overcome this problem, but unlike RNNs, they require computation time that is quadratic in the size of the context window. The linearly scaling fast weight controller (1992) learns to compute a weight matrix for further processing depending on the input. One of its two networks has "fast weights" or "dynamic links" (1981). A slow neural network learns by gradient descent to generate keys and values for computing the weight changes of the fast neural network which computes answers to queries. This was later shown to be equivalent to the unnormalized linear transformer.
=== Attention with seq2seq ===
The idea of encoder–decoder sequence transduction had been developed in the early 2010s; commonly cited as the originators that produced seq2seq are two concurrently published papers from 2014.
A 380M-parameter model for machine translation uses two long short-term memories (LSTM). Its architecture consists of two parts. The encoder is an LSTM that takes in a sequence of tokens and turns it into a vector. The decoder is another LSTM that converts the vector into a sequence of tokens. Similarly, another 130M-parameter model used gated recurrent units (GRU) instead of LSTM. Later research showed that GRUs are neither better nor worse than LSTMs for seq2seq.
These early seq2seq models had no attention mechanism, and the state vector is accessible only after the last word of the source text was processed. Although in theory such a vector retains the information about the whole original sentence, in practice the information is poorly preserved. This is because the input is processed sequentially by one recurrent network into a fixed-size output vector, which is then processed by another recurrent network into an output. If the input is long, then the output vector would not be able to contain all relevant information, degrading the output. As evidence, reversing the input sentence improved seq2seq translation.
The RNN search model introduced an attention mechanism to seq2seq for machine translation to solve the bottleneck problem (of the fixed-size output vector), allowing the model to process long-distance dependencies more easily. The name is because it "emulates searching through a source sentence during decoding a translation".
The relative performances were compared between global (that of RNN search) and local (sliding window) attention model architectures for machine translation, finding that mixed attention had higher quality than global attention, while local attention reduced translation time.
In 2016, Google Translate was revamped to Google Neural Machine Translation, which replaced the previous model based on statistical machine translation. The new model was a seq2seq model where the encoder and the decoder were both 8 layers of bidirectional LSTM. It took nine months to develop, and it outperformed the statistical approach, which took ten years to develop.
=== Parallelizing attention ===
Seq2seq models with attention (including self-attention) still suffered from the same issue with recurrent networks, which is that they are hard to parallelize, which prevented them from being accelerated on GPUs. In 2016, decomposable attention applied a self-attention mechanism to feedforward networks, which are easy to parallelize, and achieved SOTA result in textual entailment with an order of magnitude fewer parameters than LSTMs. One of its authors, Jakob Uszkoreit, suspected that attention without recurrence would be sufficient for language translation, thus the title "attention is all you need". That hypothesis was against conventional wisdom at the time, and even his father Hans Uszkoreit, a well-known computational linguist, was skeptical. In the same year, self-attention (called intra-attention or intra-sentence attention) was proposed for LSTMs.
On 2017-06-12, the original (100M-parameter) encoder–decoder transformer model was published in the "Attention is all you need" paper. At the time, the focus of the research was on improving seq2seq for machine translation, by removing its recurrence to process all tokens in parallel, but preserving its dot-product attention mechanism to keep its text processing performance. This led to the introduction of a multi-head attention model that was easier to parallelize due to the use of independent heads and the lack of recurrence. Its parallelizability was an important factor to its widespread use in large neural networks.
As early as spring 2017, even before the "Attention is all you need" preprint was published, one of the co-authors applied the "decoder-only" variation of the architecture to generate fictitious Wikipedia articles. Transformer architecture is now used alongside many generative models that contribute to the ongoing AI boom.
The "reference implementation" of the original Transformer was written in a TensorFlow library. In language modelling, ELMo (2018) was a bi-directional LSTM that produces contextualized word embeddings, improving upon the line of research from bag of words and word2vec. It was followed by BERT (2018), an encoder-only transformer model. In October 2019, Google started using BERT to process search queries. In 2020, Google Translate replaced the previous RNN-encoder–RNN-decoder model by a transformer-encoder–RNN-decoder model.
Starting in 2018, the OpenAI GPT series of decoder-only transformers became state of the art in natural language generation. At the end of 2022, ChatGPT, a chatbot based on a fine-tuned variant of GPT-3.5, became unexpectedly popular, triggering a boom around large language models.
Transformers have been applied in modalities beyond text. Four days after the publication of "Attention is All You Need", a multimodal transformer architecture, MultiModel, was published by most authors of that paper. Other examples include the vision transformer, speech recognition, robotics, and multimodal. The vision transformer, in turn, stimulated new developments in convolutional neural networks. Image and video generators like DALL-E (2021), Stable Diffusion 3 (2024), and Sora (2024), use transformers to analyse input data (like text prompts) by breaking it down into "tokens" and then calculating the relevance between each token using self-attention, which helps the model understand the context and relationships within the data.
=== Methods for stabilizing training ===
The plain transformer architecture had difficulty in converging. In the original paper, the authors recommended using learning rate warmup. That is, the learning rate should linearly scale up from 0 to maximal value for the first part of the training (usually recommended to be 2% of the total number of training steps), before decaying again.
A 2020 paper found that using layer normalization before (instead of after) multihead attention and feedforward layers stabilizes training, not requiring learning rate warmup. This is the "pre-LN Transformer" and is more commonly used, compared to the original "post-LN Transformer".
Transformers typically are first pretrained by self-supervised learning on a large generic dataset, followed by supervised fine-tuning on a small task-specific dataset. The pretrain dataset is typically an unlabeled large corpus, such as The Pile. Tasks for pretraining and fine-tuning commonly include:
The T5 transformer report documents a large number of natural language pretraining tasks. Some examples are:
restoring or repairing incomplete or corrupted text. For example, the input, "Thank you ~~ me to your party ~~ week", might generate the output, "Thank you for inviting me to your party last week".
translation between natural languages (machine translation)
judging the pragmatic acceptability of natural language. For example, the following sentence might be judged "not acceptable", because even though it is syntactically well-formed, it is improbable in ordinary human usage: The course is jumping well.
Note that while each of these tasks is trivial or obvious for human native speakers of the language (or languages), they have typically proved challenging for previous generations of machine learning architecture.
In general, there are 3 classes of language modelling tasks: "masked", "autoregressive", and "prefixLM". These classes are independent of a specific modeling architecture such as transformer, but they are often discussed in the context of transformer.
In a masked task, one or more of the tokens is masked out, and the model would produce a probability distribution predicting what the masked-out tokens are based on the context. The loss function for the task is typically sum of log-perplexities for the masked-out tokens:
{\displaystyle {\text{Loss}}=-\sum _{t\in {\text{masked tokens}}}\ln({\text{probability of }}t{\text{ conditional on its context}})}
and the model is trained to minimize this loss function. The BERT series of models are trained for masked token prediction and another task.
In an autoregressive task, the entire sequence is masked at first, and the model produces a probability distribution for the first token. Then the first token is revealed and the model predicts the second token, and so on. The loss function for the task is still typically the same. The GPT series of models are trained by autoregressive tasks.
In a prefixLM task, the sequence is divided into two parts. The first part is presented as context, and the model predicts the first token of the second part. Then that would be revealed, and the model predicts the second token, and so on. The loss function for the task is still typically the same. The T5 series of models are trained by prefixLM tasks.
Note that "masked" as in "masked language modelling" is not "masked" as in "masked attention", and "prefixLM" as in
"prefix language modeling" is not "prefixLM" as in " prefix language model".
All transformers have the same primary components:
Tokenizers, which convert text into tokens.
Embedding layer, which converts tokens and positions of the tokens into vector representations.
Transformer layers, which carry out repeated transformations on the vector representations, extracting more and more linguistic information. These consist of alternating attention and feedforward layers. There are two major types of transformer layers: encoder layers and decoder layers, with further variants.
Un-embedding layer, which converts the final vector representations back to a probability distribution over the tokens.
The following description follows exactly the transformer as described in the original paper. There are variants, described in the following section.
By convention, we write all vectors as row vectors. For example, pushing a vector through a linear layer means multiplying it by a weight matrix on the right, as
As the transformer architecture natively consists of operations over numbers (matrix multiplications, dot products, activation functions) rather than over text, there must first be a mapping from any input text to some numerical representation. This happens in three steps.
First, the input text is treated by a preprocessor, which performs both textual transformations and splits the text into coarse-grained segments called pretokens. The latter is referred to as pretokenization. Second, each pretoken is segmented further into tokens by a tokenizer that expects to only see pretokens output by its preprocessor. Each token it produces is a string of one or more characters belonging to a finite set of strings called the vocabulary
. Third, because the vocabulary is finite and known beforehand, each token can be assigned an integer identifier, and this mapping is applied to the sequence of tokens to represent any input text as a numerical sequence. Since this mapping is bijective, the output side can produce a sequence of integer identifiers which can then be turned back into tokens. After undoing some of the preprocessing, the result is again legible text.
Training a tokenizer (sometimes referred to as vocabularization) means finding a suitable vocabulary
, but also learning how to use it, since any given string
hypothetical segmentations, some of which containing segments that are not in the vocabulary. The most important hyperparameter during vocabularization is the vocabulary size
: when it is small, the learned vocabulary generally consists of characters and smaller strings, and words will be segmented into many tokens. At larger sizes, it becomes affordable to dedicate tokens to full words, although depending on the preprocessor and tokenizer, it is not necessarily the case that large vocabularies will always use the largest token(s) available to segment a word.
Because tokens are not always full words, they may also be referred to as subwords and tokenization algorithms may be referred to as subword tokenizers. This is also to differentiate these systems from traditional terminology used in older information retrieval and natural language processing systems, where "tokenization" was used to denote what is today called "pretokenization" (very crudely: splitting into words). In tokenizers that produce tokens that are not part of the vocabulary, a special token that does belong to the vocabulary is used as a generic stand-in, written as "" for "unknown". In principle, any string could be hidden by such an . Indeed, in information retrieval, pretokenizers were themselves used as tokenizers (and also called "tokenizers") with a word-level vocabulary that contained an .
Commonly used subword tokenization algorithms are byte pair encoding (BPE) and the unigram language model (ULM), which each include a vocabularization algorithm and a dedicated segmentation algorithm. There also exist several segmentation algorithms that require no learning and can be applied given a vocabulary (produced by BPE or ULM, for example), like greedily recognising tokens in a pretoken by moving through it left-to-right. Well-known software implementations of subword tokenizers are Hugging Face's tokenizers Python package implemented in Rust, and the sentencepiece Python package implemented in C++. The latter package is named as such because one of its configuration options allows disabling the built-in pretokenizer, hence effectively making entire sentences a pretoken and thus having the tokenizer see entire sentences, rather than individual words.
Each integer token identifier is converted into an embedding vector via a lookup table. Equivalently stated, it multiplies a one-hot representation of the token identifier by an embedding matrix
. For example, if the input token's identifier is
, then the one-hot representation is
{\displaystyle [0,0,0,1,0,0,\dots ]}
{\displaystyle \mathrm {Embed} (3)=[0,0,0,1,0,0,\dots ]M}
The token embedding vectors are added to their respective positional encoding vectors (see below), producing the sequence of input vectors.
The dimension of an embedding vector is called hidden size or embedding size and written as
{\displaystyle d_{\text{emb}}}
{\displaystyle d_{\text{model}}}
in the original transformer paper.
An un-embedding layer is almost the reverse of an embedding layer. Whereas an embedding layer converts a token identifier into a vector, an un-embedding layer converts a vector into a probability distribution over tokens.
The un-embedding layer is a linear-softmax layer:
{\displaystyle \mathrm {UnEmbed} (x)=\mathrm {softmax} (xW+b)}
{\displaystyle (d_{\text{emb}},|V|)}
. Some architectures use the transpose of the embedding matrix
in order to avoid needing double the amount of embedding-related parameters and to avoid divergence during training. This practice is called weight tying.
A positional encoding is a fixed-size vector representation of the relative positions of tokens within a sequence: it provides the transformer model with information about where the words are in the input sequence. This induces a bias towards the order of the input sequence, so that, for example, the input sequence "man bites dog" is processed differently from "dog bites man".
The positional encoding is defined as a function of type
{\displaystyle f:\mathbb {R} \to \mathbb {R} ^{d}}
is a positive even integer. The full positional encoding defined in the original paper is:
{\displaystyle (f(t)_{2k},f(t)_{2k+1})=(\sin(\theta ),\cos(\theta ))\quad \forall k\in \{0,1,\ldots ,d/2-1\}}
{\displaystyle \theta ={\frac {t}{r^{k}}},r=N^{2/d}}
is a free parameter that should be significantly larger than the biggest
that would be input into the positional encoding function. The original paper uses
The function is in a simpler form when written as a complex function of type
{\displaystyle f:\mathbb {R} \to \mathbb {C} ^{d/2}}
{\displaystyle f(t)=\left(e^{it/r^{k}}\right)_{k=0,1,\ldots ,{\frac {d}{2}}-1}}
The main reason for using this positional encoding function is that using it, shifts are linear transformations:
{\displaystyle f(t+\Delta t)=\mathrm {diag} (f(\Delta t))f(t)}
{\displaystyle \Delta t\in \mathbb {R} }
is the distance one wishes to shift. This allows the transformer to take any encoded position, and find the encoding of the position n-steps-ahead or n-steps-behind, by a matrix multiplication.
By taking a linear sum, any convolution can also be implemented as linear transformations:
{\displaystyle \sum _{j}c_{j}f(t+\Delta t_{j})=\left(\sum _{j}c_{j}\,\mathrm {diag} (f(\Delta t_{j}))\right)f(t)}
. This allows the transformer to take any encoded position and find a linear sum of the encoded locations of its neighbors. This sum of encoded positions, when fed into the attention mechanism, would create attention weights on its neighbors, much like what happens in a convolutional neural network language model. In the author's words, "we hypothesized it would allow the model to easily learn to attend by relative position."
In typical implementations, all operations are done over the real numbers, not the complex numbers, but since complex multiplication can be implemented as real 2-by-2 matrix multiplication, this is a mere notational difference.
=== Encoder–decoder (overview) ===
Like earlier seq2seq models, the original transformer model used an encoder–decoder architecture. The encoder consists of encoding layers that process all the input tokens together one layer after another, while the decoder consists of decoding layers that iteratively process the encoder's output and the decoder's output tokens so far.
The purpose of each encoder layer is to create contextualized representations of the tokens, where each representation corresponds to a token that "mixes" information from other input tokens via self-attention mechanism. Each decoder layer contains two attention sublayers: (1) cross-attention for incorporating the output of encoder (contextualized input token representations), and (2) self-attention for "mixing" information among the input tokens to the decoder (i.e. the tokens generated so far during inference time).
Both the encoder and decoder layers have a feed-forward neural network for additional processing of their outputs and contain residual connections and layer normalization steps. These feed-forward layers contain most of the parameters in a transformer model.
The feedforward network (FFN) modules in a transformer are 2-layered multilayer perceptrons:
{\displaystyle \mathrm {FFN} (x)=\phi (xW^{(1)}+b^{(1)})W^{(2)}+b^{(2)}}
is its activation function. The original transformer used ReLU activation.
The number of neurons in the middle layer is called intermediate size (GPT), filter size (BERT), or feedforward size (BERT). It is typically larger than the embedding size. For example, in both GPT-2 series and BERT series, the intermediate size of a model is 4 times its embedding size:
{\displaystyle d_{\text{ffn}}=4d_{\text{emb}}}
=== Scaled dot-product attention ===
The attention mechanism used in the transformer architecture are scaled dot-product attention units. For each unit, the transformer model learns three weight matrices: the query weights
The module takes three sequences, a query sequence, a key sequence, and a value sequence. The query sequence is a sequence of length
{\displaystyle \ell _{\text{seq, query}}}
, and each entry is a vector of dimension
{\displaystyle d_{\text{emb, query}}}
. Similarly for the key and value sequences.
{\displaystyle x_{i,{\text{query}}}}
in the query sequence, it is multiplied by a matrix
{\displaystyle q_{i}=x_{i,{\text{query}}}W^{Q}}
. The matrix of all query vectors is the query matrix:
{\displaystyle Q=X_{\text{query}}W^{Q}}
Similarly, we construct the key matrix
{\displaystyle K=X_{\text{key}}W^{K}}
{\displaystyle V=X_{\text{value}}W^{V}}
It is usually the case that all
{\displaystyle W^{Q},W^{K},W^{V}}
{\displaystyle d_{\text{emb, query}}=d_{\text{query}}}
Attention weights are calculated using the query and key vectors: the attention weight
. The attention weights are divided by the square root of the dimension of the key vectors,
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {d_{k}}}}
, which stabilizes gradients during training, and passed through a softmax which normalizes the weights. The fact that
are different matrices allows attention to be non-symmetric: if token
{\displaystyle q_{i}\cdot k_{j}}
is large), this does not necessarily mean that token
{\displaystyle q_{j}\cdot k_{i}}
could be small). The output of the attention unit for token
is the weighted sum of the value vectors of all tokens, weighted by
The attention calculation for all tokens can be expressed as one large matrix calculation using the softmax function, which is useful for training due to computational matrix operation optimizations that quickly compute matrix operations. The matrices
are defined as the matrices where the
respectively. Then we can represent the attention as
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\text{Attention}}(Q,K,V)={\text{softmax}}\left({\frac {QK^{\mathrm {T} }}{\sqrt {d_{k}}}}\right)V\end{aligned}}}
where the softmax is applied over each of the rows of the matrix.
The number of dimensions in a query vector is query size
{\displaystyle d_{\text{query}}}
and similarly for the key size
{\displaystyle d_{\text{key}}}
{\displaystyle d_{\text{value}}}
. The output dimension of an attention head is its head dimension
{\displaystyle d_{\text{head}}}
. The attention mechanism requires the following three equalities to hold:
{\displaystyle \ell _{\text{seq, key}}=\ell _{\text{seq, value}},\;d_{\text{query}}=d_{\text{key}},\;d_{\text{value}}=d_{\text{head}}}
but is otherwise unconstrained.
If the attention head is used in a self-attention fashion, then
{\displaystyle X_{\text{query}}=X_{\text{key}}=X_{\text{value}}}
. If the attention head is used in a cross-attention fashion, then usually
{\displaystyle X_{\text{query}}\neq X_{\text{key}}=X_{\text{value}}}
. It is theoretically possible for all three to be different, but that is rarely the case in practice.
{\displaystyle \left(W^{Q},W^{K},W^{V}\right)}
matrices is called an attention head, and each layer in a transformer model has multiple attention heads. While each attention head attends to the tokens that are relevant to each token, multiple attention heads allow the model to do this for different definitions of "relevance". Specifically, the query and key projection matrices,
, which are involved in the attention score computation, defines the "relevance". Meanwhile, the value projection matrix
, in combination with the part of the output projection matrix
, determines how the attended tokens influence what information is passed to subsequent layers and ultimately the output logits. In addition, the scope of attention, or the range of token relationships captured by each attention head, can expand as tokens pass through successive layers. This allows the model to capture more complex and long-range dependencies in deeper layers. Many transformer attention heads encode relevance relations that are meaningful to humans. For example, some attention heads can attend mostly to the next word, while others mainly attend from verbs to their direct objects. The computations for each attention head can be performed in parallel, which allows for fast processing. The outputs for the attention layer are concatenated to pass into the feedforward neural network layers.
Concretely, let the multiple attention heads be indexed by
{\displaystyle {\text{MultiheadAttention}}(Q,K,V)={\text{Concat}}_{i\in [n_{\text{heads}}]}({\text{Attention}}(XW_{i}^{Q},XW_{i}^{K},XW_{i}^{V}))W^{O}}
is the concatenation of word embeddings, and the matrices
{\displaystyle W_{i}^{Q},W_{i}^{K},W_{i}^{V}}
are "projection matrices" owned by individual attention head
is a final projection matrix owned by the whole multihead attention head.
It is theoretically possible for each attention head to have a different head dimension
{\displaystyle d_{\text{head}}}
, but that is rarely the case in practice.
As an example, in the smallest GPT-2 model, there are only self-attention mechanisms. It has the following dimensions:
{\displaystyle d_{\text{emb}}=768,n_{\text{head}}=12,d_{\text{head}}=64}
{\displaystyle 12\times 64=768}
, its output projection matrix
{\displaystyle W^{O}\in \mathbb {R} ^{(12\times 64)\times 768}}
The transformer architecture is constructed to calculate output tokens iteratively. Assuming
refers to the calculation of the first output token
shall remain constant. This ensures properties of the model similar to autoregressive models. Therefore, at every time step
, the calculation for all outputs
should not have access to tokens at position
(as it naturally is the case for time step
are not yet calculated). This behavior may be accomplished before the softmax stage by adding a mask matrix
at entries where the attention link must be cut, and
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\text{MaskedAttention}}(Q,K,V)={\text{softmax}}\left(M+{\frac {QK^{\mathrm {T} }}{\sqrt {d_{k}}}}\right)V\end{aligned}}}
The following matrix is commonly used in decoder self-attention modules, called "causal masking":
{\displaystyle M_{\text{causal}}={\begin{bmatrix}0&-\infty &-\infty &\dots &-\infty \\0&0&-\infty &\dots &-\infty \\0&0&0&\dots &-\infty \\\vdots &\vdots &\vdots &\ddots &\vdots \\0&0&0&\dots &0\end{bmatrix}}}
In words, it means that each token can pay attention to itself, and every token before it, but not any after it. A non-masked attention module can be thought of as a masked attention module where the mask has all entries zero. As an example of an uncommon use of mask matrix, the XLNet considers all masks of the form
{\displaystyle PM_{\text{causal}}P^{-1}}
is a random permutation matrix.
An encoder consists of an embedding layer, followed by multiple encoder layers.
Each encoder layer consists of two major components: a self-attention mechanism and a feed-forward layer. It takes an input as a sequence of input vectors, applies the self-attention mechanism, to produce an intermediate sequence of vectors, then applies the feed-forward layer for each vector individually. Schematically, we have:
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\text{given input vectors }}&h_{0},h_{1},\dots \\{\text{combine them into a matrix }}H&={\begin{bmatrix}h_{0}\\h_{1}\\\vdots \end{bmatrix}}\\{\text{EncoderLayer}}(H)&={\begin{bmatrix}{\text{FFN}}({\text{MultiheadAttention}}(H,H,H)_{0})\\{\text{FFN}}({\text{MultiheadAttention}}(H,H,H)_{1})\\\vdots \end{bmatrix}}\\\end{aligned}}}
stands for "feed-forward network". We can more succinctly write it as
{\displaystyle {\text{EncoderLayer}}(H)={\text{FFN}}({\text{MultiheadAttention}}(H,H,H))}
with the implicit convention that the
is applied to each row of the matrix individually.
The encoder layers are stacked. The first encoder layer takes the sequence of input vectors from the embedding layer, producing a sequence of vectors. This sequence of vectors is processed by the second encoder, and so on. The output from the final encoder layer is then used by the decoder.
As the encoder processes the entire input all at once, every token can attend to every other token (all-to-all attention), so there is no need for causal masking.
A decoder consists of an embedding layer, followed by multiple decoder layers, followed by an un-embedding layer.
Each decoder consists of three major components: a causally masked self-attention mechanism, a cross-attention mechanism, and a feed-forward neural network. The decoder functions in a similar fashion to the encoder, but an additional attention mechanism is inserted which instead draws relevant information from the encodings generated by the encoders. This mechanism can also be called the encoder–decoder attention.
Like the first encoder, the first decoder takes positional information and embeddings of the output sequence as its input, rather than encodings. The transformer must not use the current or future output to predict an output, so the output sequence must be partially masked to prevent this reverse information flow. This allows for autoregressive text generation. For decoding, all-to-all attention is inappropriate, because a token cannot attend to tokens not yet generated. Thus, the self-attention module in the decoder is causally masked.
In contrast, the cross-attention mechanism attends to the output vectors of the encoder, which is computed before the decoder starts decoding. Consequently, there is no need for masking in the cross-attention mechanism.
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}H'&={\text{MaskedMultiheadAttention}}(H,H,H)\\{\text{DecoderLayer}}(H)&={\text{FFN}}({\text{MultiheadAttention}}(H',H^{E},H^{E}))\end{aligned}}}
is the matrix with rows being the output vectors from the encoder.
The last decoder is followed by a final un-embedding layer to produce the output probabilities over the vocabulary. Then, one of the tokens is sampled according to the probability, and the decoder can be run again to produce the next token, etc., autoregressively generating output text.
== Full transformer architecture ==
Each encoder layer contains 2 sublayers: the self-attention and the feedforward network. Each decoder layer contains 3 sublayers: the causally masked self-attention, the cross-attention, and the feedforward network.
The final points of detail are the residual connections and layer normalization, (denoted as "LayerNorm", or "LN" in the following), which while conceptually unnecessary, are necessary for numerical stability and convergence.
The residual connections are introduced to avoid vanishing gradient issues and stabilize the training process. They can be expressed by
{\displaystyle x\mapsto F(x)+x}
is a given component of the transformer. Adding the input
can preserve the input information and avoid issues when the gradient of
Similarly to how the feedforward network modules are applied individually to each vector, the LayerNorm is also applied individually to each vector.
There are two common conventions in use: the post-LN and the pre-LN convention. In the post-LN convention, the output of each sublayer is
{\displaystyle \mathrm {LayerNorm} (x+\mathrm {Sublayer} (x))}
{\displaystyle \mathrm {Sublayer} (x)}
is the function implemented by the sublayer itself.
In the pre-LN convention, the output of each sublayer is
{\displaystyle x+\mathrm {Sublayer} (\mathrm {LayerNorm} (x))}
The original 2017 transformer used the post-LN convention. It was difficult to train and required careful hyperparameter tuning and a "warm-up" in learning rate, where it starts small and gradually increases. The pre-LN convention, proposed several times in 2018, was found to be easier to train, requiring no warm-up, leading to faster convergence.
The following is the pseudocode for a standard pre-LN encoder–decoder transformer, adapted from Formal Algorithms for Transformers
output: Array of probability distributions, with shape (decoder vocabulary size x length(decoder output sequence))
for each t in 1:length(z_e) do
z_e ← encoder.embedding(z_e) + encoder.positional_embedding(t)
for each l in 1:length(encoder.layers) do
for each t in 1:length(z_e) do
z_e ← layer.multihead_attention(z_e, z_e, z_e)
for each t in 1:length(z_e) do
for each t in 1:length(z_e) do
for each t in 1:length(z_e) do
for each t in 1:length(z_e) do
z_e ← encoder.final_layer_norm(z_e)
for each t in 1:length(z_d) do
z_d ← decoder.embedding(z_d) + decoder.positional_embedding(t)
for each l in 1:length(decoder.layers) do
for each t in 1:length(z_d) do
z_d ← layer.masked_multihead_attention(z_d, z_d, z_d)
for each t in 1:length(z_d) do
for each t in 1:length(z_d) do
z_d ← layer.multihead_attention(z_d, z_e, z_e)
for each t in 1:length(z_d) do
for each t in 1:length(z_d) do
for each t in 1:length(z_d) do
z_d ← decoder.final_layer_norm(z_d)
for each t in 1:length(z_d) do
output_distributions.append(decoder.unembed(z_d))
The transformer architecture, being modular, allows variations. Several common variations are described here.
An "encoder-only" transformer applies the encoder to map an input text into a sequence of vectors that represent the input text. This is usually used for text embedding and representation learning for downstream applications. BERT is encoder-only. They are less often used currently, as they were found to be not significantly better than training an encoder–decoder transformer, then taking just the encoder. They are also referred to as "all-to-all" or "BERT-like".
A "decoder-only" transformer is not literally decoder-only, since without an encoder, the cross-attention mechanism has nothing to attend to. Thus, the decoder layers in a decoder-only transformer is composed of just two sublayers: the causally masked self-attention, and the feedforward network. This is usually used for text generation and instruction following. The models in the GPT series and Chinchilla series are decoder-only. They are also referred to as "autoregressive" or "causal".
An "encoder–decoder" transformer is generally the same as the original transformer, with 2 sublayers per encoder layer and 3 sublayers per decoder layer, etc. They might have minor architectural improvements, such as alternative activation functions, changing the location of normalization, etc. This is also usually used for text generation and instruction following. The models in the T5 series are encoder–decoder.
A "prefixLM" (prefix language model) is a decoder-only architecture, but with prefix masking, which is different from causal masking. Specifically, it has mask of the form
{\displaystyle M_{\text{prefixLM}}={\begin{bmatrix}\mathbf {0} &-\infty \\\mathbf {0} &M_{\text{causal}}\end{bmatrix}}}
where the first columns correspond to the "prefix", and the subsequent columns correspond to the autoregressively generated text based on the prefix. They resemble encoder–decoder models, but has less "sparsity". Such models are rarely used, though they are cited as theoretical possibilities and benchmarked comparisons.
There are also mixed seq2seq models. For example, in 2020, Google Translate replaced the previous RNN-encoder–RNN-decoder model with a transformer-encoder–RNN-decoder model, as transformer-based decoders did not appear to significantly increase quality unlike the encoder, while the RNN decoder was much faster.
=== Alternative activation functions ===
The original transformer uses ReLU activation function. Other activation functions were developed. The Llama series and PaLM used SwiGLU; both GPT-1 and BERT used GELU.
Alternative activation functions are often used in combination with Gated Linear Units in the feedforward module.
=== Alternative normalizations ===
The normalization used in the transformer can be different from LayerNorm. One example is RMSNorm which is used in the Llama series. Other examples include ScaleNorm and FixNorm.
=== Alternative positional encodings ===
Transformers may use other positional encoding methods than sinusoidal.
The original transformer paper reported using a learned positional encoding, but finding it not superior to the sinusoidal one. Later, found that causal masking itself provides enough signal to a transformer decoder that it can learn to implicitly perform absolute positional encoding without the positional encoding module.
RoPE (rotary positional embedding), is best explained by considering a list of 2-dimensional vectors
{\displaystyle [(x_{1}^{(1)},x_{1}^{(2)}),(x_{2}^{(1)},x_{2}^{(2)}),(x_{3}^{(1)},x_{3}^{(2)}),...]}
{\displaystyle {\text{RoPE}}{\big (}x_{m}^{(1)},x_{m}^{(2)},m{\big )}={\begin{pmatrix}\cos m\theta &-\sin m\theta \\\sin m\theta &\cos m\theta \end{pmatrix}}{\begin{pmatrix}x_{m}^{(1)}\\x_{m}^{(2)}\\\end{pmatrix}}={\begin{pmatrix}x_{m}^{(1)}\cos m\theta -x_{m}^{(2)}\sin m\theta \\x_{m}^{(2)}\cos m\theta +x_{m}^{(1)}\sin m\theta \\\end{pmatrix}}}
Equivalently, if we write the 2-dimensional vectors as complex numbers
{\displaystyle z_{m}:=x_{m}^{(1)}+ix_{m}^{(2)}}
, then RoPE encoding is just multiplication by an angle:
{\displaystyle {\text{RoPE}}{\big (}z_{m},m{\big )}=e^{im\theta }z_{m}}
-dimensional vectors, a RoPE encoder is defined by a sequence of angles
{\displaystyle \theta ^{(1)},...,\theta ^{(n)}}
. Then the RoPE encoding is applied to each pair of coordinates.
The benefit of RoPE is that the dot-product between two vectors depends on their relative location only:
{\displaystyle {\text{RoPE}}{\big (}x,m{\big )}^{T}{\text{RoPE}}{\big (}y,n{\big )}={\text{RoPE}}{\big (}x,m+k{\big )}^{T}{\text{RoPE}}{\big (}y,n+k{\big )}}
ALiBi (Attention with Linear Biases) is not a replacement for the positional encoder on the original transformer. Instead, it is an additional positional encoder that is directly plugged into the attention mechanism. Specifically, the ALiBi attention mechanism is
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\text{Attention}}(Q,K,V)={\text{softmax}}\left({\frac {QK^{\mathrm {T} }}{\sqrt {d_{k}}}}+sB\right)V\end{aligned}}}
is a real number ("scalar"), and
is the linear bias matrix defined by
{\displaystyle B={\begin{pmatrix}0&1&2&3&\cdots \\-1&0&1&2&\cdots \\-2&-1&0&1&\cdots \\-3&-2&-1&0&\cdots \\\vdots &\vdots &\vdots &\vdots &\ddots \\\end{pmatrix}}}
. The idea being that the linear bias matrix is a softened mask. Just as
represent full attention paid, and
represents no attention paid, the linear bias matrix increases attention paid in one direction and decreases attention paid in the other direction.
ALiBi allows pretraining on short context windows, then fine-tuning on longer context windows. Since it is directly plugged into the attention mechanism, it can be combined with any positional encoder that is plugged into the "bottom" of the entire network (which is where the sinusoidal encoder on the original transformer, as well as RoPE and many others, are located).
==== Relative Position Encodings ====
Relative Position Encodings is similar to ALiBi, but more generic:
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}{\text{Attention}}(Q,K,V)={\text{softmax}}\left({\frac {QK^{\mathrm {T} }}{\sqrt {d_{k}}}}+B\right)V\end{aligned}}}
is a Toeplitz matrix, that is,
{\displaystyle B_{i,j}=B_{i',j'}}
. This is contrasted with the original sinusoidal positional encoding, which is an "absolute positional encoding".
=== Efficient implementation ===
The transformer model has been implemented in standard deep learning frameworks such as TensorFlow and PyTorch. Transformers is a library produced by Hugging Face that supplies transformer-based architectures and pretrained models.
When an autoregressive transformer is used for inference, such as generating text, the query vector is different at each step, but the already-computed key and value vectors are always the same. The KV caching method saves the computed key and value vectors at each attention block, so that they are not recomputed at each new token. PagedAttention applies memory paging to KV caching.
If a transformer is used with a baked-in prompt, such as ["You are a customer support agent..."], then the key and value vectors can be computed for the prompt, and saved on disk. The saving in compute is significant when the model is used for many short real-time interactions, such as in online chatbots.
In general, when a user uses an autoregressive transformer to generate a continuation to a sequence of tokens, the model would first perform a forward-pass on this sequence, whereby the KV caches over this sequence are computed. This is called prefilling. Hyperscalers serving large Transformer models may use disaggregated inference, wherein prefilling and decoding are performed on separately specialized hardware.
FlashAttention is an algorithm that implements the transformer attention mechanism efficiently on a GPU. It is a communication-avoiding algorithm that performs matrix multiplications in blocks, such that each block fits within the cache of a GPU, and by careful management of the blocks it minimizes data copying between GPU caches (as data movement is slow). See the page on softmax for details.
An improved version, FlashAttention-2, was developed to cater to the rising demand for language models capable of handling longer context lengths. It offers enhancements in work partitioning and parallelism, enabling it to achieve up to 230 TFLOPs/s on A100 GPUs (FP16/BF16), a 2x speed increase over the original FlashAttention.
Key advancements in FlashAttention-2 include the reduction of non-matmul FLOPs, improved parallelism over the sequence length dimension, better work partitioning between GPU warps, and added support for head dimensions up to 256 and multi-query attention (MQA) and grouped-query attention (GQA).
Benchmarks revealed FlashAttention-2 to be up to 2x faster than FlashAttention and up to 9x faster than a standard attention implementation in PyTorch. Future developments include optimization for new hardware like H100 GPUs and new data types like FP8.
FlashAttention-4 focuses on pipelining to increase instruction throughput, and was developed to perform particularly well on Blackwell GPUs.
==== Multi-Query Attention ====
Multi-Query Attention changes the Multihead Attention mechanism. Whereas normally,
{\displaystyle {\text{MultiheadAttention}}(Q,K,V)={\text{Concat}}_{i\in [n_{\text{heads}}]}\left({\text{Attention}}(XW_{i}^{Q},XW_{i}^{K},XW_{i}^{V})\right)W^{O}}
with Multi-Query Attention, there is just one
{\displaystyle {\text{MultiQueryAttention}}(Q,K,V)={\text{Concat}}_{i\in [n_{\text{heads}}]}\left({\text{Attention}}(XW_{i}^{Q},XW^{K},XW^{V})\right)W^{O}}
This has a neutral effect on model quality and training speed, but increases inference speed.
More generally, grouped-query attention (GQA) partitions attention heads into groups, each of which shares the key-value pair. MQA is GQA with one group, while standard Multihead Attention is GQA with the maximal number of groups.
Multihead Latent Attention (MLA) is a low-rank approximation to standard MHA. Specifically, each hidden vector, before entering the attention mechanism, is first projected to two low-dimensional spaces ("latent space"), one for query and one for key-value (KV vector). This design minimizes the KV cache, as only the low-dimensional KV vector needs to be cached.
==== Speculative decoding ====
Speculative decoding is a method to accelerate token decoding. Similarly to speculative execution in CPUs, future tokens are computed quickly, then verified. If the quickly computed tokens are incorrect, they are discarded and computed slowly.
The key factor in speculative decoding is that a transformer decoder can verify faster than it can decode, in the following sense.
Suppose we have two transformer models like GPT-3 and GPT-3-small, both with a context window size of 512. To generate an entire context window autoregressively with greedy decoding with GPT-3, it must be run for 512 times, each time generating a token
{\displaystyle x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{512}}
{\displaystyle 512T_{\text{GPT-3}}}
. However, if we had some educated guess for the values of these tokens, we could verify all of them in parallel, in one run of the model, by checking that each
is indeed the token with the largest log-likelihood in the
In speculative decoding, a smaller model or some other simple heuristic is used to generate a few speculative tokens that are subsequently verified by the larger model. For example, suppose we use GPT-3-small to generate four speculative tokens:
{\displaystyle {\tilde {x}}_{1},{\tilde {x}}_{2},{\tilde {x}}_{3},{\tilde {x}}_{4}}
{\displaystyle 4T_{\text{GPT-3-small}}}
. These tokens are then run through the larger GPT-3 in one go. Suppose that
{\displaystyle {\tilde {x}}_{1}}
{\displaystyle {\tilde {x}}_{2}}
are verified by GPT-3 as what it would have picked, then those are kept, but
{\displaystyle {\tilde {x}}_{3}}
{\displaystyle {\tilde {x}}_{3},{\tilde {x}}_{4}}
are discarded, and GPT-3 is run on those. This would take
{\displaystyle 4T_{\text{GPT-3-small}}+3T_{\text{GPT-3}}}
{\displaystyle 4T_{\text{GPT-3}}}
For non-greedy decoding, similar ideas apply, except the speculative tokens are accepted or rejected stochastically, in a way that guarantees the final output distribution is the same as if speculative decoding was not used.
In Multi-Token Prediction, a single forward pass creates a final embedding vector, which then is un-embedded into a token probability. However, that vector can then be further processed by another transformer block to predict the next token, and so on for arbitrarily many steps into the future. This trades off accuracy for speed, since each new token costs just one more transformer block, rather than the entire stack.
=== Sub-quadratic transformers ===
Training transformer-based architectures can be expensive, especially for long inputs. Many methods have been developed to attempt to address the issue. In the image domain, Swin transformer is an efficient architecture that performs attention inside shifting windows. In the audio domain, SepTr decouples the attention in time and frequency domains. Long Range Arena (2020) is a standard benchmark for comparing the behavior of transformer architectures over long inputs.
==== Alternative attention graphs ====
The standard attention graph is either all-to-all or causal, both of which scales as
is the number of tokens in a sequence.
Reformer (2020) reduces the computational load from
by using locality-sensitive hashing and reversible layers.
Sparse attention uses attention graphs that grows slower than
. For example, BigBird (2020) uses random small-world networks which grows as
Ordinary transformers require a memory size that is quadratic in the size of the context window. Attention-free transformers reduce this to a linear dependence while still retaining the advantages of a transformer by linking the key to the value.
==== Random Feature Attention ====
Random Feature Attention (2021) uses Fourier random features:
{\displaystyle \varphi (x)={\frac {1}{\sqrt {D}}}[\cos \langle w_{1},x\rangle ,\sin \langle w_{1},x\rangle ,\cdots \cos \langle w_{D},x\rangle ,\sin \langle w_{D},x\rangle ]^{T}}
{\displaystyle w_{1},...,w_{D}}
are independent samples from the normal distribution
{\displaystyle N(0,\sigma ^{2}I)}
. This choice of parameters satisfy
{\displaystyle \mathbb {E} [\langle \varphi (x),\varphi (y)\rangle ]=e^{-{\frac {\|x-y\|^{2}}{2\sigma ^{2}}}}}
{\displaystyle e^{\langle x,y\rangle /\sigma ^{2}}=\mathbb {E} [\langle e^{\|x\|^{2}/2\sigma ^{2}}\varphi (x),e^{\|y\|^{2}/2\sigma ^{2}}\varphi (y)\rangle ]\approx \langle e^{\|x\|^{2}/2\sigma ^{2}}\varphi (x),e^{\|y\|^{2}/2\sigma ^{2}}\varphi (y)\rangle }
Consequently, the one-headed attention, with one query, can be written as
{\displaystyle {\text{Attention}}(q,K,V)={\text{softmax}}\left({\frac {qK^{\mathrm {T} }}{\sqrt {d_{k}}}}\right)V\approx {\frac {\varphi (q)^{T}\sum _{i}e^{\|k_{i}\|^{2}/2\sigma ^{2}}\varphi (k_{i})v_{i}^{T}}{\varphi (q)^{T}\sum _{i}e^{\|k_{i}\|^{2}/2\sigma ^{2}}\varphi (k_{i})}}}
{\displaystyle \sigma =d_{K}^{1/4}}
. Similarly for multiple queries, and for multihead attention.
This approximation can be computed in linear time, as we can compute the matrix
{\displaystyle \varphi (k_{i})v_{i}^{T}}
first, then multiply it with the query. In essence, we have managed to obtain a more precise version of
{\displaystyle {\text{Attention}}(Q,K,V)={\text{softmax}}\left({\frac {QK^{\mathrm {T} }}{\sqrt {d_{k}}}}\right)V\approx Q(K^{T}V/{\sqrt {d_{k}}})}
Performer (2022) uses the same Random Feature Attention, but
{\displaystyle w_{1},...,w_{D}}
are first independently sampled from the normal distribution
{\displaystyle N(0,\sigma ^{2}I)}
, then they are Gram–Schmidt processed.
Transformers can also be used/adapted for modalities (input or output) beyond just text, usually by finding a way to "tokenize" the modality.
Multimodal models can either be trained from scratch, or by finetuning. A 2022 study found that transformers pretrained only on natural language can be finetuned on only 0.03% of parameters and become competitive with LSTMs on a variety of logical and visual tasks, demonstrating transfer learning. The LLaVA was a vision-language model composed of a language model (Vicuna-13B) and a vision model (ViT-L/14), connected by a linear layer. Only the linear layer is finetuned.
Vision transformers adapt the transformer to computer vision by breaking down input images as a series of patches, turning them into vectors, and treating them like embedding vector of tokens in a standard transformer.
Conformer and later Whisper follow the same pattern for speech recognition, first turning the speech signal into a spectrogram, which is then treated like an image, i.e. broken down into a series of patches, turned into vectors and treated like embedding vector of tokens in a standard transformer.
Perceivers are a variant of transformers designed for multimodality.
For image generation, notable architectures are DALL-E 1 (2021), Parti (2022), Phenaki (2023), and Muse (2023). Unlike later models, DALL-E is not a diffusion model. Instead, it uses a decoder-only transformer that autoregressively generates a text, followed by the token representation of an image, which is then converted by a variational autoencoder to an image. Parti is an encoder–decoder transformer, where the encoder processes a text prompt, and the decoder generates a token representation of an image. Muse is an encoder-only transformer that is trained to predict masked image tokens from unmasked image tokens. During generation, all input tokens are masked, and the highest-confidence predictions are included for the next iteration, until all tokens are predicted. Phenaki is a text-to-video model. It is a bidirectional masked transformer conditioned on pre-computed text tokens. The generated tokens are then decoded to a video.
The transformer has had great success in natural language processing (NLP). Many large language models such as GPT-2, GPT-3, GPT-4, Gemini, AlbertAGPT, Claude, BERT, Grok, XLNet, RoBERTa and ChatGPT demonstrate the ability of transformers to perform a wide variety of NLP-related subtasks and their related real-world applications, including:
named entity recognition (NER)
writing computer code based on requirements expressed in natural language.
Beyond traditional NLP, the transformer architecture has had success in other applications, such as:
protein folding (such as AlphaFold)
evaluating chess board positions. Using static evaluation alone (that is, with no Minimax search) transformer achieved an Elo of 2895, putting it at grandmaster level.
seq2seq – Family of machine learning approaches
Circuit (neural network) – Interpretable computational sub-graphs within artificial neural networks
Perceiver – Variant of Transformer designed for multimodal data
Vision transformer – Machine learning model for vision processing
Large language model – Type of machine learning model
BERT (language model) – Series of language models developed by Google AI
Generative pre-trained transformer – Type of large language model
T5 (language model) – Series of large language models developed by Google AI

--- Article: Python ---
Pythonidae, a family of nonvenomous snakes found in Africa, Asia, and Australia
Python (genus), a genus of Pythonidae found in Africa and Asia
Python (mythology), a mythical serpent
Python (programming language), a widely used high-level programming language
Python, a native code compiler for CMU Common Lisp
Python, the internal project name for the PERQ 3 computer workstation
Python (film), a 2000 horror film by Richard Clabaugh
Monty Python or the Pythons, a British comedy group
Python (Monty) Pictures, a company owned by the troupe's surviving members
Python, a work written by philosopher Timon of Phlius
Python of Aenus (4th-century BCE), student of Plato
Python (painter) (ca. 360–320 BCE), vase painter in Poseidonia
Python of Byzantium (4th-century BCE), orator, diplomat of Philip II of Macedon
Python of Catana, poet who accompanied Alexander the Great
Python Anghelo (1954–2014), Romanian graphic artist
Python (Efteling), a roller coaster in the Netherlands
Python (Busch Gardens Tampa Bay), Florida, United States, a defunct roller coaster
Python (Coney Island, Cincinnati, Ohio), United States, a steel roller coaster
Klondike Gold Mine, at Drayton Manor, Staffordshire, England, formerly called "The Python"
Python (automobile maker), an Australian car company
Python (Ford prototype), a Ford prototype sports car
Python (missile), a series of Israeli air-to-air missiles
Python (nuclear primary), a gas-boosted fission primary used in thermonuclear weapons
Python (codename), a British nuclear war contingency plan
Operation Python, Indian naval operation during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971
All pages with titles beginning with Python
All pages with titles containing Python
Pithon, a commune in northern France

--- Article: Python (programming language) ---
Python is a high-level, general-purpose programming language that emphasizes code readability, simplicity, and ease-of-writing with the use of significant indentation, an extensive ("batteries-included") standard library, and garbage collection. Python supports multiple programming paradigms but with an emphasis on object-oriented programming and dynamic typing.
Guido van Rossum began working on Python in the late 1980s as a successor to the ABC programming language. Python 3.0, released in 2008, was a major revision and not completely backward-compatible with earlier versions. Beginning with Python 3.5, capabilities and keywords for typing were added to the language, allowing optional static typing. As of 2026, the Python Software Foundation supports Python 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, and 3.14, following the project's annual release cycle and five-year support policy. Python 3.15 is currently in the beta development phase, and the stable release is expected to launch in October 2026. Earlier versions in the 3.x series have reached end-of-life and no longer receive security updates.
Python has gained extensive use in the machine learning community. It is widely taught as an introductory programming language. Since 2003, Python has consistently ranked among the top ten most popular programming languages in the TIOBE Programming Community Index, which ranks programming languages based on searches across 24 platforms.
Python was conceived in the late 1980s by Guido van Rossum at Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI) in the Netherlands. It was designed as a successor to the ABC programming language, which was inspired by SETL, capable of exception handling and interfacing with the Amoeba operating system. Python implementation began in December 1989. Van Rossum first released it in 1991 as Python 0.9.0. Van Rossum assumed sole responsibility for the project, as the lead developer, until 12 July 2018, when he announced his "permanent vacation" from responsibilities as Python's "benevolent dictator for life" (BDFL); this title was bestowed on him by the Python community to reflect his long-term commitment as the project's chief decision-maker. (He has since come out of retirement and is self-titled "BDFL-emeritus".) In January 2019, active Python core developers elected a five-member Steering Council to lead the project.
The name Python derives from the British comedy series Monty Python's Flying Circus. (See § Naming.)
Python 2.0 was released on 16 October 2000, featuring many new features such as list comprehensions, cycle-detecting garbage collection, reference counting, and Unicode support. Python 2.7's end-of-life was initially set for 2015, and then postponed to 2020 out of concern that a large body of existing code could not easily be forward-ported to Python 3. It no longer receives security patches or updates. While Python 2.7 and older versions are officially unsupported, a different unofficial Python implementation, PyPy, continues to support Python 2, i.e., "2.7.18+" (plus 3.11), with the plus signifying (at least some) "backported security updates".
Python 3.0 was released on 3 December 2008, and was a major revision and not completely backward-compatible with earlier versions, with some new semantics and changed syntax. Python 2.7.18, released in 2020, was the last release of Python 2. Several releases in the Python 3.x series have added new syntax to the language, and made a few (considered very minor) backward-incompatible changes.
As of May 2026, Python 3.14.6 is the latest stable release. All older 3.x versions had a security update down to Python 3.9.24 then again with 3.9.25, the final version in 3.9 series. Python 3.10 is, since November 2025, the oldest supported branch. Python 3.15 has an alpha released, and Android has an official downloadable executable available for Python 3.14. Releases receive two years of full support followed by three years of security support.
== Design philosophy and features ==
Python is a multi-paradigm programming language. Object-oriented programming and structured programming are fully supported, and many of their features support functional programming and aspect-oriented programming – including metaprogramming and metaobjects. Many other paradigms are supported via extensions, including design by contract and logic programming. Python is often referred to as a 'glue language' because it is purposely designed to be able to integrate components written in other languages.
Python uses dynamic typing and a combination of reference counting and a cycle-detecting garbage collector for memory management. It uses dynamic name resolution (late binding), which binds method and variable names during program execution.
Python's design offers some support for functional programming in the "Lisp tradition". It has filter, map, and reduce functions; list comprehensions, dictionaries, sets, and generator expressions. The standard library has two modules (itertools and functools) that implement functional tools borrowed from Haskell and Standard ML.
Python's core philosophy is summarized in the Zen of Python (PEP 20) written by Tim Peters, which includes aphorisms such as these:
Explicit is better than implicit.
Simple is better than complex.
Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
Although practicality beats purity, errors should never pass silently, unless explicitly silenced.
There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.
However, Python has received criticism for violating these principles and adding unnecessary language bloat. Responses to these criticisms note that the Zen of Python is a guideline rather than a rule. The addition of some new features had been controversial: Guido van Rossum resigned as Benevolent Dictator for Life after conflict about adding the assignment expression operator in Python 3.8.
Nevertheless, rather than building all functionality into its core, Python was designed to be highly extensible through modules. This compact modularity has made it particularly popular as a means of adding programmable interfaces to existing applications. Van Rossum's vision of a small core language with a large standard library and an easily extensible interpreter stemmed from his frustrations with ABC, which represented the opposite approach.
Python claims to strive for a simpler, less-cluttered syntax and grammar, while giving developers a choice in their coding methodology. Python lacks do .. while loops, which Rossum considered harmful. In contrast to Perl's motto "there is more than one way to do it", Python advocates an approach where "there should be one – and preferably only one – obvious way to do it". In practice, however, Python provides many ways to achieve a given goal. There are at least three ways to format a string literal, with no certainty as to which one a programmer should use. Alex Martelli is a Fellow at the Python Software Foundation and Python book author; he wrote that "To describe something as 'clever' is not considered a compliment in the Python culture."
Python's developers typically prioritize readability over performance. For example, they reject patches to non-critical parts of the CPython reference implementation that would offer increases in speed that do not justify the cost of clarity and readability. Execution speed can be improved by moving speed-critical functions to extension modules written in languages such as C, or by using a just-in-time compiler like PyPy. Also, it is possible to transpile to other languages. However, this approach either fails to achieve the expected speed-up, since Python is a very dynamic language, or only a restricted subset of Python is compiled (with potential minor semantic changes).
Python is meant to be a fun language to use. This goal is reflected in the name – a tribute to the British comedy group Monty Python – and in playful approaches to some tutorials and reference materials. For instance, some code examples use the terms "spam" and "eggs" (in reference to a Monty Python sketch), rather than the typical terms "foo" and "bar".
A common neologism in the Python community is pythonic, which has a broad range of meanings related to program style: Pythonic code may use Python idioms well; be natural or show fluency in the language; or conform with Python's minimalist philosophy and emphasis on readability.
Python Enhancement Proposals are a design document for either providing information to the Python community, or proposal for new feature in Python. PEPs are intented to explain new processes in Python, provide naming conventions or document the processes in the language. PEPs are overseen by Python Steering Council.
There are 3 kinds of PEPs, with those are being standards track PEP, Informational PEP and Process PEPs which has their own unique meanings. They were firstly introduced in 2000, inspired by other RfCs (requests for comments) and Desing Enhancement Proposals. Most known PEPs are PEP – 1, PEP – 8, PEP – 20, PEP – 257 and others.
Python is meant to be an easily readable language. Its formatting is visually uncluttered and often uses English keywords where other languages use punctuation. Unlike many other languages, it does not use curly brackets to delimit blocks, and semicolons after statements are allowed but rarely used. It has fewer syntactic exceptions and special cases than C or Pascal.
Python uses whitespace indentation, rather than curly brackets or keywords, to delimit blocks. An increase in indentation comes after certain statements; a decrease in indentation signifies the end of the current block. Thus, the program's visual structure accurately represents its semantic structure. This feature is sometimes termed the off-side rule. Some other languages use indentation this way; but in most, indentation has no semantic meaning. The recommended indent size is four spaces.
=== Statements and control flow ===
Python's statements include the following:
The assignment statement, using a single equals sign =
The if statement, which conditionally executes a block of code, along with else and elif (a contraction of else if)
The for statement, which iterates over an iterable object, capturing each element to a variable for use by the attached block; the variable is not deleted when the loop finishes
The while statement, which executes a block of code as long as boolean condition is true
The try statement, which allows exceptions raised in its attached code block to be caught and handled by except clauses (or new syntax except* in Python 3.11 for exception groups); the try statement also ensures that clean-up code in a finally block is always run regardless of how the block exits
The raise statement, used to raise a specified exception or re-raise a caught exception
The class statement, which executes a block of code and attaches its local namespace to a class, for use in object-oriented programming
The def statement, which defines a function or method
The with statement, which encloses a code block within a context manager, allowing resource-acquisition-is-initialization (RAII)-like behavior and replacing a common try/finally idiom Examples of a context include acquiring a lock before some code is run, and then releasing the lock; or opening and then closing a file
The break statement, which exits a loop
The continue statement, which skips the rest of the current iteration and continues with the next
The del statement, which removes a variable—deleting the reference from the name to the value, and producing an error if the variable is referred to before it is redefined
The pass statement, serving as a NOP (i.e., no operation), which is syntactically needed to create an empty code block
The assert statement, used in debugging to check for conditions that should apply
The yield statement, which returns a value from a generator function (and also an operator); used to implement coroutines
The return statement, used to return a value from a function
The import and from statements, used to import modules whose functions or variables can be used in the current program. Python 3.15 adds a new functionality to lazily import with a new keyword: "The lazy keyword works with both import and from ... import statements."
The match and case statements, analogous to a switch statement construct, which compares an expression against one or more cases as a control-flow measure
The assignment statement (=) binds a name as a reference to a separate, dynamically allocated object. Variables may subsequently be rebound at any time to any object. In Python, a variable name is a generic reference holder without a fixed data type; however, it always refers to some object with a type. This is called dynamic typing—in contrast to statically-typed languages, where each variable may contain only a value of a certain type.
Python does not support tail call optimization or first-class continuations; according to Van Rossum, the language never will. However, better support for coroutine-like functionality is provided by extending Python's generators. Before 2.5, generators were lazy iterators; data was passed unidirectionally out of the generator. From Python 2.5 on, it is possible to pass data back into a generator function; and from version 3.3, data can be passed through multiple stack levels.
Python's expressions include the following:
The +, -, and * operators for mathematical addition, subtraction, and multiplication are similar to other languages, but the behavior of division differs. There are two types of division in Python: floor division (or integer division) //, and floating-point division /. Python uses the ** operator for exponentiation.
Python uses the + operator for string concatenation. The language uses the * operator for duplicating a string a specified number of times.
The @ infix operator is intended to be used by libraries such as NumPy for matrix multiplication.
The syntax :=, called the "walrus operator", was introduced in Python 3.8. This operator assigns values to variables as part of a larger expression.
In Python, == compares two objects by value. Python's is operator may be used to compare object identities (i.e., comparison by reference), and comparisons may be chained—for example, a <= b <= c.
Python uses and, or, and not as Boolean operators.
Python has a type of expression called a list comprehension, and a more general expression called a generator expression.
Anonymous functions are implemented using lambda expressions; however, there may be only one expression in each body.
Conditional expressions are written as x if c else y. (This is different in operand order from the c ? x : y operator common to many other languages.)
Python makes a distinction between lists and tuples. Lists are written as [1, 2, 3], are mutable, and cannot be used as the keys of dictionaries (since dictionary keys must be immutable in Python). Tuples, written as (1, 2, 3), are immutable and thus can be used as the keys of dictionaries, provided that all of the tuple's elements are immutable. The + operator can be used to concatenate two tuples, which does not directly modify their contents, but produces a new tuple containing the elements of both. For example, given the variable t initially equal to (1, 2, 3), executing t = t + (4, 5) first evaluates t + (4, 5), which yields (1, 2, 3, 4, 5); this result is then assigned back to t—thereby effectively "modifying the contents" of t while conforming to the immutable nature of tuple objects. Parentheses are optional for tuples in unambiguous contexts.
Python features sequence unpacking where multiple expressions, each evaluating to something assignable (e.g., a variable or a writable property) are associated just as in forming tuple literal; as a whole, the results are then put on the left-hand side of the equal sign in an assignment statement. This statement expects an iterable object on the right-hand side of the equal sign to produce the same number of values as the writable expressions on the left-hand side; while iterating, the statement assigns each of the values produced on the right to the corresponding expression on the left.
Python has a "string format" operator % that functions analogously to printf format strings in the C language—e.g. "spam=%s eggs=%d" % ("blah", 2) evaluates to "spam=blah eggs=2". In Python 2.6+ and 3+, this operator was supplemented by the format() method of the str class, e.g., "spam={0} eggs={1}".format("blah", 2). Python 3.6 added "f-strings": spam = "blah"; eggs = 2; f'spam={spam} eggs={eggs}'.
Strings in Python can be concatenated by "adding" them (using the same operator as for adding integers and floats); e.g., "spam" + "eggs" returns "spameggs". If strings contain numbers, they are concatenated as strings rather than as integers, e.g. "2" + "2" returns "22".
Python supports string literals in several ways:
Delimited by single or double quotation marks; single and double quotation marks have equivalent functionality (unlike in Unix shells, Perl, and Perl-influenced languages). Both marks use the backslash (\) as an escape character. String interpolation became available in Python 3.6 as "formatted string literals".
Triple-quoted, i.e., starting and ending with three single or double quotation marks; this may span multiple lines and function like here documents in shells, Perl, and Ruby.
Raw string varieties, denoted by prefixing the string literal with r. Escape sequences are not interpreted; hence raw strings are useful where literal backslashes are common, such as in regular expressions and Windows-style paths. (Compare "@-quoting" in C#.)
Python has array index and array slicing expressions in lists, which are written as a, a[start:stop] or a[start:stop:step]. Indexes are zero-based, and negative indexes are relative to the end. Slices take elements from the start index up to, but not including, the stop index. The (optional) third slice parameter, called step or stride, allows elements to be skipped or reversed. Slice indexes may be omitted—for example, a[:] returns a copy of the entire list. Each element of a slice is a shallow copy.
In Python, a distinction between expressions and statements is rigidly enforced, in contrast to languages such as Common Lisp, Scheme, or Ruby. This distinction leads to duplicating some functionality, for example:
List comprehensions vs. for-loops
Conditional expressions vs. if blocks
The eval() vs. exec() built-in functions (in Python 2, exec is a statement); the former function is for expressions, while the latter is for statements
A statement cannot be part of an expression; because of this restriction, expressions such as list and dict comprehensions (and lambda expressions) cannot contain statements. As a particular case, an assignment statement such as a = 1 cannot be part of the conditional expression of a conditional statement.
Python uses duck typing, and it has typed objects but untyped variable names. Type constraints are not checked at definition time; rather, operations on an object may fail at usage time, indicating that the object is not of an appropriate type. Despite being dynamically typed, Python is strongly typed, forbidding operations that are poorly defined (e.g., adding a number and a string) rather than quietly attempting to interpret them.
Python allows programmers to define their own types using classes, most often for object-oriented programming. New instances of classes are constructed by calling the class, for example, SpamClass() or EggsClass()); the classes are instances of the metaclass type (which is an instance of itself), thereby allowing metaprogramming and reflection.
Before version 3.0, Python had two kinds of classes, both using the same syntax: old-style and new-style. Current Python versions support the semantics of only the new style.
Python supports optional type annotations. These annotations are not enforced by the language, but may be used by external tools such as mypy to catch errors. Python includes a module typing including several type names for type annotations. Also, mypy supports a Python compiler called mypyc, which leverages type annotations for optimization.
Python includes conventional symbols for arithmetic operators (+, -, *, /), the floor-division operator //, and the modulo operator %. (With the modulo operator, a remainder can be negative, e.g., 4 % -3 == -2.) Python also offers the ** symbol for exponentiation, e.g. 5**3 == 125 and 9**0.5 == 3.0, as well as the matrix‑multiplication operator @. These operators work as in traditional mathematics; with the same precedence rules, the infix operators + and - can also be unary, to represent positive and negative numbers respectively.
Division between integers produces floating-point results. The behavior of division has changed significantly over time:
The current version of Python (i.e., since 3.0) changed the / operator to always represent floating-point division, e.g., 5/2 == 2.5.
The floor division // operator was introduced, meaning that 7//3 == 2, -7//3 == -3, 7.5//3 == 2.0, and -7.5//3 == -3.0. For Python 2.7, adding the from __future__ import division statement allows a module in Python 2.7 to use Python 3.x rules for division (see above).
In Python terms, the / operator represents true division (or simply division), while the // operator represents floor division. Before version 3.0, the / operator represents classic division.
Rounding towards negative infinity, though a different method than in most languages, adds consistency to Python. For instance, this rounding implies that the equation (a + b)//b == a//b + 1 is always true. Also, the rounding implies that the equation b*(a//b) + a%b == a is valid for both positive and negative values of a. As expected, the result of a%b lies in the half-open interval [0, b), where b is a positive integer; however, maintaining the validity of the equation requires that the result must lie in the interval (b, 0] when b is negative.
Python provides a round function for rounding a float to the nearest integer. For tie-breaking, Python 3 uses the round to even method: round(1.5) and round(2.5) both produce 2. Python versions before 3 used the round-away-from-zero method: round(0.5) is 1.0, and round(-0.5) is −1.0.
Python allows Boolean expressions that contain multiple equality relations to be consistent with general usage in mathematics. For example, the expression a < b < c tests whether a is less than b and b is less than c. C-derived languages interpret this expression differently: in C, the expression would first evaluate a < b, resulting in 0 or 1, and that result would then be compared with c.
Python uses arbitrary-precision arithmetic for all integer operations. The Decimal type/class in the decimal module provides decimal floating-point numbers to a pre-defined arbitrary precision with several rounding modes. The Fraction class in the fractions module provides arbitrary precision for rational numbers.
Due to Python's extensive mathematics library and the third-party library NumPy, the language is frequently used for scientific scripting in tasks such as numerical data processing and manipulation.
Functions are created in Python by using the def keyword. A function is defined similarly to how it is called, by first providing the function name and then the required parameters. Here is an example of a function that prints its inputs:
To assign a default value to a function parameter in case no actual value is provided at run time, variable-definition syntax can be used inside the function header.
Program to calculate the factorial of a non-negative integer:
Python's large standard library is commonly cited as one of its greatest strengths. For Internet-facing applications, many standard formats and protocols such as MIME and HTTP are supported. The language includes modules for creating graphical user interfaces, connecting to relational databases, generating pseudorandom numbers, arithmetic with arbitrary-precision decimals, manipulating regular expressions, and unit testing.
Some parts of the standard library are covered by specifications—for example, the Web Server Gateway Interface (WSGI) implementation wsgiref follows PEP 333—but most parts are specified by their code, internal documentation, and test suites. However, because most of the standard library is cross-platform Python code, only a few modules must be altered or rewritten for variant implementations.
As of 13 March 2025, the Python Package Index (PyPI), the official repository for third-party Python software, contains over 614,339 packages.
== Development environments ==
Most Python implementations (including CPython) include a read–eval–print loop (REPL); this permits the environment to function as a command line interpreter, with which users enter statements sequentially and receive results immediately.
Also, CPython is bundled with an integrated development environment (IDE) called IDLE, which is oriented toward beginners.
Other shells, including IDLE and IPython, add additional capabilities such as improved auto-completion, session-state retention, and syntax highlighting.
Standard desktop IDEs include PyCharm, Spyder, and Visual Studio Code; there are web browser-based IDEs, such as the following environments:
Jupyter Notebooks, an open-source interactive computing platform;
PythonAnywhere, a browser-based IDE and hosting environment; and
Canopy, a commercial IDE from Enthought that emphasizes scientific computing.
=== Reference implementation ===
CPython is the reference implementation of Python. This implementation is written in C, meeting the C11 standard since version 3.11. Older versions use the C89 standard with several select C99 features, but third-party extensions are not limited to older C versions—e.g., they can be implemented using C11 or C++. CPython compiles Python programs into an intermediate bytecode, which is then executed by a virtual machine. CPython is distributed with a large standard library written in a combination of C and native Python.
CPython is available for many platforms, including Windows and most modern Unix-like systems, including macOS (and Apple M1 Macs, since Python 3.9.1, using an experimental installer). Starting with Python 3.9, the Python installer intentionally fails to install on Windows 7 and 8; Windows XP was supported until Python 3.5. Old Python versions unofficially support VMS (mostly supporting) and OpenVMS x86-64 has Python 3.10 support. Platform portability was one of Python's earliest priorities. During development of Python 1 and 2, even OS/2 and Solaris were supported; since that time, support has been dropped for many platforms.
All current Python versions (since 3.7) support only operating systems that feature multithreading, by now supporting not nearly as many operating systems (dropping many outdated) than in the past.
=== Limitations of the reference implementation ===
The energy usage of Python with CPython for typically written code is much worse than C by a factor of 75.88.
The throughput of Python with CPython for typically written code is worse than C by a factor of 71.9.
The average memory usage of CPython for typically written code is worse than C by a factor of 2.4.
All alternative implementations have at least slightly different semantics. For example, an alternative may include unordered dictionaries, in contrast to other current Python versions. As another example in the larger Python ecosystem, PyPy does not support the full C Python API.
Creating an executable with Python often is done by bundling an entire Python interpreter into the executable, which causes binary sizes to be massive for small programs, yet there exist implementations that are capable of truly compiling Python. Alternative implementations include the following:
PyPy is a faster, compliant interpreter of Python 2.7 and 3.11. PyPy's just-in-time compiler often improves speed significantly relative to CPython, but PyPy does not support some libraries written in C. PyPy offers support for the RISC-V instruction-set architecture.
Codon is an implementation with an ahead-of-time (AOT) compiler, which compiles a statically-typed Python-like language whose "syntax and semantics are nearly identical to Python's, there are some notable differences" For example, Codon uses 64-bit machine integers for speed, not arbitrarily as with Python; Codon developers claim that speedups over CPython are usually on the order of ten to a hundred times. Codon compiles to machine code (via LLVM) and supports native multithreading. Codon can also compile to Python extension modules that can be imported and used from Python.
MicroPython and CircuitPython are Python 3 variants that are optimized for microcontrollers, including the Lego Mindstorms EV3.
Pyston is a variant of the Python runtime that uses just-in-time compilation to speed up execution of Python programs.
Cinder is a performance-oriented fork of CPython 3.8 that features a number of optimizations, including bytecode inline caching, eager evaluation of coroutines, a method-at-a-time JIT, and an experimental bytecode compiler.
The Snek embedded computing language "is Python-inspired, but it is not Python. It is possible to write Snek programs that run under a full Python system, but most Python programs will not run under Snek." Snek is compatible with 8-bit AVR microcontrollers such as ATmega 328P-based Arduino, as well as larger microcontrollers that are compatible with MicroPython. Snek is an imperative language that (unlike Python) omits object-oriented programming. Snek supports only one numeric data type, which features 32-bit single precision (resembling JavaScript numbers, though smaller).
RustPython is an implementation written in Rust (programming language). It aims to be compatible with CPython, including its C-ABI. Currently, it is used in GrepTimeDB and Ruff among other projects.
=== Unsupported implementations ===
Stackless Python is a significant fork of CPython that implements microthreads. This implementation uses the call stack differently, thus allowing massively concurrent programs. PyPy also offers a stackless version.
Just-in-time Python compilers have been developed, but are now unsupported:
Google began a project named Unladen Swallow in 2009: this project aimed to speed up the Python interpreter five-fold by using LLVM, and improve multithreading capability for scaling to thousands of cores, while typical implementations are limited by the global interpreter lock.
Psyco is a discontinued just-in-time specializing compiler, which integrates with CPython and transforms bytecode to machine code at runtime. The emitted code is specialized for certain data types and is faster than standard Python code. Psyco does not support Python 2.7 or later.
PyS60 was a Python 2 interpreter for Series 60 mobile phones, which was released by Nokia in 2005. The interpreter implemented many modules from Python's standard library, as well as additional modules for integration with the Symbian operating system. The Nokia N900 also supports Python through the GTK widget library, allowing programs to be written and run on the target device.
=== Transpilers to other languages ===
There are several compilers/transpilers to high-level object languages; the source language is unrestricted Python, a subset of Python, or a language similar to Python:
Brython and Transcrypt compile Python to JavaScript.
Cython compiles a superset of Python to C. The resulting code can be used with Python via direct C-level API calls into the Python interpreter.
PyJL compiles/transpiles a subset of Python to "human-readable, maintainable, and high-performance Julia source code". Despite the developers' performance claims, this is not possible for arbitrary Python code; that is, compiling to a faster language or machine code is known to be impossible in the general case. The semantics of Python might potentially be changed, but in many cases speedup is possible with few or no changes in the Python code. The faster Julia source code can then be used from Python or compiled to machine code.
Nuitka compiles Python into C. This compiler works with Python 3.4 to 3.13 (and 2.6 and 2.7) for Python's main supported platforms (and Windows 7 or even Windows XP) and for Android. The compiler developers claim full support for Python 3.10, partial support for Python 3.11 and 3.12, and experimental support for Python 3.13. Nuitka supports macOS including Apple Silicon-based versions. The compiler is free of cost, though it has commercial add-ons (e.g., for hiding source code).
Numba is a JIT compiler that is used from Python; the compiler translates a subset of Python and NumPy code into fast machine code. This tool is enabled by adding a decorator to the relevant Python code.
Pythran compiles a subset of Python 3 to C++ (C++11).
RPython can be compiled to C, and it is used to build the PyPy interpreter for Python.
The Python → 11l → C++ transpiler compiles a subset of Python 3 to C++ (C++17).
There are also specialized compilers:
MyHDL is a Python-based hardware description language (HDL) that converts MyHDL code to Verilog or VHDL code.
Some older projects existed, as well as compilers not designed for use with Python 3.x and related syntax:
Google's Grumpy transpiles Python 2 to Go. The latest release was in 2017.
IronPython allows running Python 2.7 programs with the .NET Common Language Runtime. An alpha version (released in 2021), is available for "Python 3.4, although features and behaviors from later versions may be included."
Jython compiles Python 2.7 to Java bytecode, allowing the use of Java libraries from a Python program.
Pyrex (last released in 2010) and Shed Skin (last released in 2013) compile to C and C++ respectively.
A performance comparison among various Python implementations, using a non-numerical (combinatorial) workload, was presented at EuroSciPy '13. In addition, Python's performance relative to other programming languages is benchmarked by The Computer Language Benchmarks Game.
There are several approaches to optimizing Python performance, despite the inherent slowness of an interpreted language. These approaches include the following strategies or tools:
Just-in-time compilation: Dynamically compiling parts of a Python program during the execution of the program. This technique is used in libraries such as Numba and PyPy.
Static compilation: Sometimes, Python code can be compiled into machine code sometime before execution. An example of this approach is Cython, which compiles Python into C.
Concurrency and parallelism: Multiple tasks can be run simultaneously. Python contains modules such as `multiprocessing` to support this form of parallelism. Moreover, this approach helps to overcome limitations of the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in CPU tasks.
Efficient data structures: Performance can also be improved by using data types such as Set for membership tests, or deque from collections for queue operations.
Performance gains can be observed by utilizing libraries such as NumPy. Most high performance Python libraries use C or Fortran under the hood instead of the Python interpreter.
Python's development is conducted mostly through the Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP) process; this process is the primary mechanism for proposing major new features, collecting community input on issues, and documenting Python design decisions. Python coding style is covered in PEP 8. Outstanding PEPs are reviewed and commented on by the Python community and the steering council.
Enhancement of the language corresponds with development of the CPython reference implementation. The mailing list python-dev is the primary forum for the language's development. Specific issues were originally discussed in the Roundup bug tracker hosted by the foundation. In 2022, all issues and discussions were migrated to GitHub. Development originally took place on a self-hosted source-code repository running Mercurial, until Python moved to GitHub in January 2017.
CPython's public releases have three types, distinguished by which part of the version number is incremented:
Backward-incompatible versions, where code is expected to break and must be manually ported. The first part of the version number is incremented. These releases happen infrequently—version 3.0 was released 8 years after 2.0. According to Guido van Rossum, a version 4.0 will probably never exist.
Major or "feature" releases are largely compatible with the previous version but introduce new features. The second part of the version number is incremented. Starting with Python 3.9, these releases are expected to occur annually. Each major version is supported by bug fixes for several years after its release.
Bug fix releases, which introduce no new features, occur approximately every three months; these releases are made when a sufficient number of bugs have been fixed upstream since the last release. Security vulnerabilities are also patched in these releases. The third and final part of the version number is incremented.
Many alpha, beta, and release-candidates are also released as previews and for testing before final releases. Although there is a rough schedule for releases, they are often delayed if the code is not ready yet. Python's development team monitors the state of the code by running a large unit test suite during development.
The major academic conference on Python is PyCon. Also, there are special Python mentoring programs, such as PyLadies.
Python's name is inspired by the British comedy group Monty Python, whom Python creator Guido van Rossum enjoyed while developing the language. Monty Python references appear frequently in Python code and culture; for example, the metasyntactic variables often used in Python literature are spam and eggs, rather than the traditional foo and bar. Also, the official Python documentation contains various references to Monty Python routines. Python users are sometimes referred to as "Pythonistas".
== Languages influenced by Python ==
Cobra has an Acknowledgements document that lists Python first among influencing languages.
ECMAScript and JavaScript borrowed iterators and generators from Python.
Go is designed for "speed of working in a dynamic language like Python".
Julia was designed to be "as usable for general programming as Python".
Mojo is almost a superset of Python.
GDScript is strongly influenced by Python.
Groovy, Boo, CoffeeScript, F#, Nim, Ruby, Swift, and V have been influenced, as well.
List of machine learning and deep learning software for Python
List of Python programming books
Google Colab – zero setup online IDE that runs Python
"Python for Artificial Intelligence". Python Wiki. 19 July 2012. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2012.
Paine, Jocelyn, ed. (August 2005). "AI in Python". AI Expert Newsletter. Amzi!. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 11 February 2012.
"PyAIML 0.8.5: Python Package Index". Pypi.python.org. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
Russell, Stuart J. & Norvig, Peter (2009). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-604259-4.
Downey, Allen (July 2024). Think Python: How to Think Like a Computer Scientist (3rd ed.). O'Reilly Media. ISBN 978-1-0981-5543-8.
Lutz, Mark (2013). Learning Python (5th ed.). O'Reilly Media. ISBN 978-0-596-15806-4.
Summerfield, Mark (2009). Programming in Python 3 (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley Professional. ISBN 978-0-321-68056-3.
Ramalho, Luciano (May 2022). Fluent Python. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 978-1-4920-5632-4.